9 schwann cell oligodendrocyte myelin sheath axon illustration 1. 3 formation of myelin sheath cell body illustration 1. 2 neuron - structure and function cytoplasm nucleus neuron neuron or nerve cell is the basic structural unit of the nervous system. like all other cells, the neuron has a cell membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus. analyse illustration 1. 2 and tabulate the main parts of a neuron, its characteristics and function. write them down in the science diary. axons of most of the neurons are repeatedly encircled by myelin, a membrane containing lipid. this is called myelin sheath. analyse illustration 1. 3 and the description. find out the characteristics and significance of myelin sheath and prepare a note on the basis of the indicators given. dendrite • branches of dendron.

• part that receives impulses from adjacent neuron. dendron • short filament from the cell body. • carries impulses from dendrites to the cell body. schwann cell • encircles the axon. axon • longest filament from the cell body. • carries impulses from the cell body to outside. axonite • branches of axon. • carries impulses to the synaptic knob. synaptic knob • tip of axonite. • secretes neurotransmitter. 10 figure 1. 2 a figure 1. 2 c figure 1. 2 b stimulus nerve is a group of axons. myelin sheath in the nerves is formed of schwann cells. myelin sheath in the brain and the spinal cord is formed of specialized cells called oligodendrocytes. the myelin sheath has a shiny white colour. the part of the brain and the spinal cord where myelinated nerve cells are present in abundance is

called white matter and the part where non - myelinated nerves cells are present is called grey matter. the major functions of the myelin sheath are to provide nutrients and oxygen to the axon, accelerate impulses, act as an electric insulator and protect the axon from external shocks. indicators • formation of myelin sheath. • grey matter, white matter. • functions of myelin sheath. oligodendrocytes and schwann cells oligodendrocytes and schwann cells provide protection to neurons. an oligodendrocyte constructs myelin sheath by covering the different axons simultaneously or by covering the different parts of the same axon repeatedly. myelin sheath made up of schwann cells are seen in the axons in nerves. a schwann cell encircles the axon repeatedly. generation and transmission of impulses

the nervous system manages control and co - ordination through impulses. how are these impulses generated and transmitted through neurons? analyse the given figures ( 1. 2 a, b, c ) on the basis of the description and the indicators, and arrive at your own inferences. the outer surface of the plasma membrane of the neuron is positively charged and the inner surface is negatively charged. this is due to the difference in the distribution of certain ions ( figure 1. 2 a ). 11 synaptic knob synaptic cleft dendrite neurotransmitter electric impulse electric impulse illustration 1. 4 synapse when stimulated, the distribution of ions in that particular part changes and hence the inner surface becomes positively charged and the outer surface becomes negatively charged ( figure 1. 2 b ).

this momentary charge difference stimulates its adjacent parts and similar changes occur there too. as this process proceeds, ( figure 1. 2 c ) impulses get transmitted as electric charges. nerve impulses are messages transmitted through the neurons. indicators • charges on either side of the plasma membrane. • change in the charges of ions when stimulated. • transmission of nerve impulse. synapse impulses generated in the receptor cells reach the brain. the brain analyses it and gives direction for proper response. to make this possible, the impulses formed in a neuron are to be transmitted to other neurons and associated cells. how does this become possible? analyse illustration 1. 4 and 1. 5 given below, and the description. prepare a note, based on the indicators and your analysis.

synapse is the junction between two neurons or a neuron and a muscle cell or a neuron and a glandular cell. when electric impulses from the axon reach the synaptic knob, certain chemical substances are secreted from there to the synaptic cleft. these chemical substances are called neurotransmitters. they stimulate the adjacent dendrite or cell and new electric impulses are generated. acetylcholine and dopamine are examples of neurotransmitters. synapse helps to regulate the speed and direction of impulses. synapse 12 axon nerve connective tissue figure 1. 3 cross section of a nerve indicators • structure of synapse. • transmission of impulses through synapse. • significance of neurotransmitter. • different types of synapses. glandular cell

illustration 1. 5 different types of synapses nerve cell muscle cell on the basis of the direction of impulse, neurons can be classified into sensory neurons and motor neurons. sensory neurons carry impulses to the brain and spinal cord. motor neurons carry impulses from the brain and spinal cord to various parts of the body. different types of neuron nerves you know that nerves are group of axons or nerve fibres. they are covered by connective tissue ( figure 1. 3 ). nerves are classified into three on the basis of their functions. analyse table 1. 1 and prepare notes in your science diary. nerves and their peculiarities functions sensory nerve ( formed of sensory nerve fibres ) motor nerve ( formed of motor nerve fibres ) mixed nerve ( formed of sensory nerve fibres and motor nerve fibres )

carries impulses from various parts of the body to the brain and the spinal cord. carries impulses from brain and spinal cord to various parts of the body. carries impulses to and from the brain and spinal cord. table 1. 1 nerves and their functions 13 illustration 1. 6 central nervous system peripheral nervous system spinal cord cranial nerves ( 12 pair ) spinal nerves ( 31 pair ) brain figure 1. 4 meninges skull layers of meninges nervous system central nervous system brain spinal nerves nervous system the nervous system consists of two parts, namely the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. analyse illustration 1. 6 and complete the flow chart. brain brain is the central part of the nervous system. based on the indicators, analyse figure 1. 4 and

the description, understand how the brain gets nutrition and protection. make notes in your science diary. the brain is protected inside the skull. it is covered by the meninges, a three - layered membrane. the cerebrospinal fluid is filled within the inner membranes of meninges and the ventricles of the brain. 14 cerebellum • the second largest part of the brain. • seen behind the cerebrum as two flaps. • fissures and grooves are present. • coordinates muscular activities and maintains equilibrium of the body. cerebrum • the largest part of the brain. • numerous fissures and folds are seen. • the grey coloured outer part of cerebrum is called cortex and the white coloured inner part is called medulla. • centre of thought, intelligence, memory and imagination. • evokes sensations.

• controls voluntary movements. hypothalamus • situated just below the thalamus. • plays a major role in the maintenance of homeostasis. thalamus • situated below the cerebrum. • acts as relay station of impulses to and from the cerebrum. • analyses impulses from various parts of the body and sends the important ones to the cerebrum. illustration 1. 7 structure and function of the brain medulla oblongata • the rod shaped medulla oblongata is seen below the cerebrum, located near the cerebellum. • controls involuntary actions like heart beat, breathing etc. the cerebrospinal fluid formed from the blood is reabsorbed into the blood. the functions of the cerebrospinal fluid are to provide nutrients and oxygen to the

tissues of the brain, regulate the pressure inside the brain and to protect the brain from injuries. indicators • protection of the brain. • nourishment of the brain. the different parts of the brain control and coordinate all life activities. analyse illustration 1. 7 showing the structure of the brain and list the characteristics and functions of each part. 15 dorsal root ventral root illustration 1. 8 cross section of the spinal cord central canal grey matter white matter aren ' t you convinced of the importance of the brain? discuss the necessity of wearing helmets while riding two wheelers. the spinal cord within the vertebral column the spinal cord of a new born baby extends upto the tip of the vertebral column. but in adults, it is seen only upto the middle of the vertebral

column. this is because the spinal cord does not grow in proportion to the growth of the vertebral column. there are 31 pairs of spinal nerves arising from the spinal cord. a dorsal root and a ventral root join to form a spinal nerve. sensory impulses reach the spinal cord through the dorsal root. motor impulses go out of the spinal cord through the ventral root. impulses from different parts of the body are transmitted to and from the brain through the spinal cord. it also coordinates the repeated movements during walking, running etc. indicators • protection of the spinal cord. • formation of the spinal nerves. • functions of the spinal cord. spinal cord the spinal cord is the continuation of the medulla oblongata. on the basis of the indicators, analyse

illustration 1. 8 and the description and prepare notes in your science diary. the spinal cord is protected inside the vertebral column. like the brain, the spinal cord is also covered by meninges. the central canal seen in the centre of the spinal cord is also filled with cerebrospinal fluid. in the spinal cord, white matter is seen outside and grey matter is seen inside. 16 illustration 1. 9 the pathway of impulses in a reflex action interneuron the neuron that connects the sensory neuron and the motor neuron. generates quick responses according to the sensory impulses. motor neuron carries the information from spinal cord to related muscles. sensory neuron carries impulses to the spinal cordreceptor generates impulses. related muscle withdraws the hand by the action of the muscles.

stimulus observe figure 1. 5. what is the peculiarity of such responses? analyse the description given below and note down the peculiarities. the accidental and involuntary responses towards stimuli are called reflex actions. they do not happen consciously. how does reflex action happen in our body? analyse illustration 1. 9 and the description and complete the flow chart. figure 1. 5 different responses 17 stimulus alcohol and reflex alcohol accelerates the action of gama amino butyric acid ( gaba ), a neurotransmitter in the brain. higher doses of this neurotransmitter retard the brain action which in turn weakens the reflex action and prevents making proper decision at proper time. is it advisable to lift up people quickly by holding

their arms or legs in an accident. what aspects related to spinal cord are to be taken care of while attending injured persons? discuss. reflex arc is the pathway of impulses in the reflex action. mainly spinal cord acts as the centre of reflex action and such reflexes are called spinal reflexes. but all reflexes are not under the control of the spinal cord. don ’ t we blink our eyes when light suddenly falls on our eyes or when objects move towards them? this is also a reflex action. such reflexes under the control of the cerebrum are called cerebral reflexes. autonomous nervous system there may be instances in your life when you felt sudden fear or sadness. write down some of those experiences. • seeing a snake suddenly • • what are the changes that take place in the body during such

emergency situations? list them. • heart beat increases • • • 18 illustration 1. 10 autonomous nervous system the pupil in the eye dilates. production of saliva decreases. trachea expands heart beat increases. gastric activities slow down. glycogen is converted to glucose. peristalsis in the intestine slows down. production of hormone increases. the pupil in the eye contracts. production of saliva increases. trachea contracts. heart beat becomes normal. gastric activities become normal. glucose is converted to glycogen. peristalsis in the intestine becomes normal. urinary bladder contracts. production of hormone decreases. urinary bladder regains normal state. sympathetic system parasympathetic system shouldn ' t these changes return to normal state? discuss.

activities that take place beyond the conscious level are controlled by the autonomous nervous system, a part of the peripheral nervous system. the sympathetic system and the parasympathetic system together form the autonomous nervous system. analyse illustration 1. 10 to understand the actions of sympathetic and parasympathetic systems during emergency situations and complete table 1. 2. 19 organ / part action of action of sympathetic system parasympathetic system pupil salivary gland t rachea heart stomach liver intestine urinary bladder table 1. 2 action of sympathetic and parasympathetic systems symptomsdisease causes loss of memory, inability to recognize friends and relatives, inability to do routine works. loss of body balance, irregular movement of

muscles, shivering of the body, profuse salivation. epilepsy due to continuous muscular contraction, frothy discharge from the mouth, clenching of the teeth following which the patient falls unconscious. alzheimer ' s parkinsons epilepsy accumulation of an insoluble protein in the neural tissues of the brain. neurons get destroyed. destruction of specialised ganglions in the brain. production of dopamine, a neurotransmitter in the brain gets reduced. continuous and irregular flow of electric charges in the brain. table 1. 3 certain diseases affecting the nervous system nervous system and its disorders a healthy nervous system is the basis of normal body activities. even minor defects in the nervous system may cause serious health problems. list out the familiar

diseases that affect the nervous system. $ rabies $ $ conduct a seminar on ' the diseases affecting the nervous system ' by analysing table 1. 3 and collecting more information on it. 20 what should be our approach towards people affected by such diseases? discuss. the nervous system helps us to experience various stimuli as well as to respond towards them. special care should be taken to maintain the health of this organ system. receptors that receive stimuli promote the actions of nervous system. it would be very interesting to know about these receptors and the sense organs in which they are included. 1. the part of the brain which helps to maintain balance of the body. a ) cerebrum b ) cerebellum c ) medulla oblongata d ) thalamus 2. identify the relation and fill in the blank.

irregular flow of charge in the brain : epilepsy decrease in the production of dopamine : - - - - - - - - - - - 3. analyse the following situations and answer the questions. • a thorn pierces the foot. • the leg is withdrawn. • the thorn is taken out slowly. a ) write the stimuli and responses. b ) was the leg withdrawn after sensing the pain? identify the reflex action. prepare an illustration showing the parts through which the impulses were transmitted. • construct a model of the human brain using suitable scrap materials and exhibit it in the class. • prepare the script of a short play which contains the methods of first aid to be given to people who have met with accidents and present it. earthquake victims rescued katmantu : rescued victims who got trapped in the collapsed buildings due to

earthquake in the eastern regions of katmantu, the capital of nepal. the rescue operation was difficult due to heavy rain and insufficient light. specially trained dogs helped to detect the victims and save their lives during the crisis. did you notice the news? why are dogs more capable than human beings in tracking the injured in such circumstances? discuss. the number of receptors in the sense organs is different in different organisms. the surface of a postage stamp is enough to arrange all the olfactory cells in the nose of a human being. but a large scarf is required to arrange the olfactory cells of a dog. now, you might have understood that the number of receptors influence the efficiency of sense organs. there are different types

of receptors in our sense organs to receive stimuli. expand the given table by adding sense organs and their receptors. 22 table 2. 1 sense organs and receptors $ eye $ ear $ tongue $ skin $ nose olfactory receptor smell sense organs receptor stimulus figure 2. 1 structure of the eye pupil iris cornea sclera choroid retina optic nerve lens conjunctiva yellow spot blind spot eye eye is the major sense organ that helps the brain to evoke sensation. how are the eyes protected? discuss and fill in the blanks. • eye socket : depressions in the skull • external eye muscles : fix the eye balls in the orbit • eyebrow : • eyelashes : • eyelids : • conjunctiva : secretes mucus which protects the anterior portion of the eye ball from being dry.

• tears : clean and lubricate the anterior part of the eye ball. lysozyme, the enzyme present in tears, destroys germs that enter the eyes. how far is the structure of an eye adapted to perform its function? observe figure 2. 1 and illustration 2. 1. on the basis of the indicators, write your inferences in the science diary. 23 layers of the eye the white outer layer which gives firmness to the eye. made up of connective tissues. the middle layer which contains a large number of blood vessels. the inner layer which has photoreceptors. sclera choroid retina the layer which covers and protects the front part of sclera except the cornea. conjunctiva the projected transparent anterior part of the sclera which refracts light rays to focus on the retina. cornea the part of the

choroid seen behind the cornea. presence of the pigment melanin gives the iris a dark colour. the aperture seen at the centre of the iris. the size of this aperture increases and decreases depending on the intensity of light. pupil elastic transparent convex lens, connected to ciliary muscles by thread like ligaments. lens circular muscles seen around the lens. the contraction and relaxation of these muscles alter the curvature of lens. ciliary muscles the part of the retina where plenty of photoreceptors are present. it is the point of maximum visual clarity. the part of the retina from where the optic nerve begins. here there is no vision as photoreceptors are absent. blind spot transmits impulses from photoreceptors to the visual centre in the brain. optic nerve

illustration 2. 1 the eye - parts and functions iris yellow spot 24 change in pupil in dim light change in pupil in bright light figure 2. 2 regulation of light in the eye circular muscles contractradial muscles contract indicators • layers of the eye and their function. • position and significance of lens and cornea. • position of iris and the pupil. • location and function of fluids present in the eye. regulation of light in the eye the entry of a large amount of light is harmful to the tissues of the eye. iris and the aperture at its centre called pupil regulate the amount of light falling on the eyes. analyse figure 2. 2 and the description regarding the changes in the pupil in dim light and bright light, and form inferences.

the size of the pupil is regulated by the action of circular muscles and radial muscles. when the radial muscles contract in dim light, the size of the pupil increases. when the circular muscles contract in intense light, the size of the pupil decreases. thus the amount of light falling on the lens is regulated according to the intensity of light. the jelly like substance seen in the vitreous chamber between the retina and the lens. helps in maintaining the shape of the eye. the fluids in the eye aqueous humor vitreous humor the water like fluid filled in the aqueous chamber between the lens and the cornea. it is formed from blood, and is reabsorbed into blood. provides oxygen and nourishment to the tissues of the eye. 25 lens distant object nearby object lens ciliary muscles ligaments

while viewing distant objects while viewing nearby objects ciliary muscles ligaments illustration 2. 2 while viewing distant and nearby objects figure 2. 3 formation of image while viewing nearby objects while viewing distant objects ciliary muscles contract ciliary muscles relax ligaments relax ligaments stretch curvature of lens. curvature of lens. focal length. focal length. table 2. 2 formation of image the curvature of the cornea and the lens help light rays which reflect from an object to get focussed on the retina. what are the peculiarities of the image formed by the lens of the eye? observe figure 2. 3 and list the peculiarities. discuss and modify. • • • real we can see nearby and distant objects clearly. this is because the

focal length of the lens can be adjusted according to the distance of the object. analyse illustration 2. 2 which explains this and complete table 2. 2. write your inferences in the science diary. 26 figure 2. 4 rod cell and cone cell rod cell cone cell table 2. 3 pigment shape function the ability of the eye to adjust the focal length of the lens by changing its curvature in accordance to the distance of the object from the eye and form the image on the retina is called the power of accommodation of the eye. retina and the photoreceptors you might have understood that photoreceptors are present in the retina. rod cells and cone cells are the photoreceptors in the retina. rod cells are more in number than cone cells. observe figure 2. 4 and relate the shape of photoreceptors with

their names. analyse the description and compare the photoreceptors and complete table 2. 3. rod cells contain the visual pigment called rhodopsin. this pigment is formed from a protein named opsin and retinal which is a derivative of vitamin a. since they are activated even in dim light, we are able to see objects in dim light. these cells cannot detect colour. cone cells contain a pigment called photopsin. this is also called iodopsin. this pigment is also composed of opsin and retinal. there are three types of cone cells in our eyes, which help us to detect three primary colours of light – red, green and blue. this diversity is due to the difference in amino acids in the opsin molecule. so, cone cells provide us with colour vision. 27 photopsin retinal + opsin retinal + opsin light

illustration 2. 3 formation of impulses in photoreceptors rhodopsin light impluse sense of sight figure 2. 5 sense of sight in the presence of light, the pigments present in photoreceptors, dissociate. this chemical change leads to the formation of impulses. these impulses are transmitted to the cerebrum through optic nerves and this enables vision. indicators • factors present in the visual pigments. • formation of impulses in photoreceptors. • sense of sight. complete the flowchart related to the sense of sight given below. the chemistry of vision how are impulses formed in photoreceptors to make vision possible? analyse illustration 2. 3, figure 2. 5 and the description and write your inferences in the science diary. binocular vision

aren ' t two images of the same object formed in our two eyes? but we see only one image of the object. how does this happen? 28 figure 2. 6 binocular vision try the activity given below. stretch your left hand forward. close your right eye and focus on the forefinger of your left hand. now close your left eye and without changing the direction of your head, focus on the same finger. do you notice any change in the position of the finger? observe figure 2. 6. the images from two sides of the same object are formed in the left and right eye. when these two images combine as a result of the activities of the brain, a three dimensional image of the object is formed. this is called binocular vision. eye – defects and diseases you are now aware of some of the eye defects. prepare a note on

eye defects and their remedies. • myopia • • let us familiarise ourselves with a few more eye defects and diseases. night blindness you have studied that the retinal, a part of the visual pigment, is derived from vitamin a. the deficiency of vitamin a results in the low production of retinal. this in turn prevents the resynthesis of rhodopsin. in this condition, objects cannot be seen clearly in dim light and this disease is called night blindness. xerophthalmia if there is a prolonged deficiency of vitamin a, the conjunctiva and cornea become dry and opaque. this causes xerophthalmia and leads ultimately to blindness. xerophthalmia 29 figure 2. 7 colour blindness observe figure 2. 7. can you read the figure clearly? you are aware that the retina contains cone cells

which can detect red, green and blue colours. some persons cannot distinguish green and red colours due to the defect of cone cells. this condition is called colour blindness. can you guess why persons with colour blindness are not selected for military or for jobs like that of a driver, pilot etc? discuss. computer vision syndrome glaucoma aqueous humor is the fluid which nourishes the tissues in the eyes. if the reabsorption of aqueous humor does not occur, it causes an increase in the pressure inside the eyes. this causes damage to the retina and the photoreceptor cells and ultimately leads to blindness. this defect is called glaucoma. it can be rectified by laser surgery. cataract it is a condition in which the lens of the eyes become opaque resulting in blindness. this can

be rectified by replacing the lens with an artificial one, through surgery. conjunctivitis this is an infection of the conjunctiva. the causative organisms may be bacteria, virus etc. this disease is transmitted through contact and can be prevented by maintaining personal hygiene. protection of eyes what are the things to be taken care of to ensure the health of the eyes? the problems of the eyes caused by the excessive use of cell phones, computer, tablet etc is called computer vision syndrome. the continuous use of such devices affects the ability of the eye to focus. headache is its major symptom. drying of the eye, high pressure in the eye etc are other symptoms. 30 internal ear figure 2. 8 structure of the ear middle ear external ear may your eyes see this world even after death.

eye donation life donation discuss on the basis of the indicators given below. indicators • food materials rich in vitamin a and health of the eye. • excessive use of mobile, computer etc and health of the eye. observe the poster. prepare a presentation on the procedure of ' eye donation ' by collecting data and present it in the class. ear you have studied that auditory receptors are present in the ear. the ear not only helps us in hearing, but also in maintaining the balance of the body. observe figure 2. 8 and list the main parts of the ear. let us examine the main parts of the ear in detail. 31 ear ossicles amplify and transmit the vibrations of the tympanum to the internal ear. malleus incus eustachian tube connects the middle ear and the pharynx. protects the tympanum by balancing

the pressure on either side of the tympanum. figure 2. 10 structure of the middle ear stapes figure 2. 9 external ear - parts pinna carries sound waves to the auditory canal. auditory canal carries sound waves to the tympanum. small hairs and wax present inside the canal help to prevent dust and foreign particles from entering the ear. tympanum a thin circular membrane that separates the middle ear from the external ear. it vibrates in resonance with sound waves. indicators • function of pinna. • importance of the auditory canal. middle ear analyse figure 2. 10 and prepare a table by including the parts of the middle ear and their functions. external ear observe figure 2. 9 and prepare a note on the basis of the indicators. 32 upper chamber illustration 2. 4 cochlea and fluid movements

lower chamber middle chamber oval window membrane seen attached to the stapes. spreads the vibration of ear ossicles to the inner ear. round window helps in the movement of fluid inside the cochlea. semicircular canals vestibular nerve cochlea auditory nerve vestibule figure 2. 11 structure of the internal ear the internal ear is situated inside a bony case in the skull called the bony labyrinth. in this bony case there are membraneous labyrinths as well. the space inside the membraneous labyrinth is filled with a fluid named endolymph. the space between the membraneous and bony labyrinth is filled with a fluid called perilymph. semicircular canals, vestibule and cochlea are the main parts of the internal ear. semicircular canals and vestibule help

in balancing the body whereas cochlea helps in hearing. how is hearing possible? observe illustration 2. 4 of uncoiled cochlea. internal ear observe figure 2. 11 and understand the parts of the internal ear. 33 pinna oval windowhair cells impulse sense of hearing sound waves figure 2. 12 vestibule, semicircular canals hair cells in semicircular canal semicircular canals vestibule cochlea is a coiled tube like a snail shell. it consists of three chambers. specialized sensory hair cells which are present in the basilar membrane that separates the middle and lower chambers, function as auditory receptors. the basilar membrane and sensory hair cells together constitute the organ of corti. the sound waves which pass through the external ear vibrate

the tympanum. this vibration of the tympanum is transmitted to the ear ossicles which causes the vibration of the membrane in the oval window. this vibration further causes the movement of the fluid inside the cochlea. as a result, the sensory hair cells of the organ of corti of the cochlea are stimulated and impulses are generated. these impulses reach the cerebrum through the auditory nerve and hearing is effected. analyse illustration 2. 4 and the description and complete the flow chart given below by including the parts of the ear that bring about the sense of hearing. also prepare a note in your science diary. ear and body balancing doesn ’ t the ear help in maintaining the balance of the body? how is it possible? analyse figure 2. 12 and

the description based on the indicators and prepare a flow chart on body balance maintaining. body balance is maintained in accordance with the movement of the head. movements of the head bring about the movement of the endolymph present inside the vestibule and the semicircular canals. this causes movement of the sensory hair cells and generates impulses. these impulses are transmitted by the vestibular nerves to the cerebellum, and the equilibrium of the body is maintained. 34 figure 2. 13 receptors in the tongue papilla taste bud hearing aid deafness is caused by structural deformities or diseases of the ears. hearing aids are also included in the various methods of treatment of deafness. hearing aid is a small electronic equipment that can be fitted internally or behind the ear.

hearing aids are a boon for the hearing impaired to work in the main stream of society. indicators • parts of the internal ear which help in body balance. • generation of impulses. to detect taste isn ' t taste, one of the reasons for enjoying the food we eat? what are the different types of tastes we can detect? analyse the description and figure 2. 13 given below, and understand the mechanisms about detecting taste. based on the indicators, prepare a flowchart on the method of detecting taste. chemoreceptors seen inside the mouth and tongue help us to detect taste. these are seen mainly on the surface of the tongue. the projected structures seen on the surface of the tongue are called papillae. the parts seen on the papillae that detect taste are the taste buds. we have taste buds that

are stimulated by tastes like sweet, salt, sour, bitter, umami etc. 35 mucus olfactory receptors olfactory nerve mucus glands olfactory receptors nasal cavity figure 2. 14 olfactory receptors diversity of tastes umami is a japanese term that means happiness. milk, meat, sea food, mushroom etc contain factors that provide the taste of umami. a sixth taste named oleogustus is also identified. it is the taste of lipid. each taste bud has chemoreceptors that help to detect different tastes. substances responsible for taste dissolve in saliva, stimulate the chemoreceptors and generate impulses. these impulses reach the brain through the respective nerves and we experience taste. indicators • taste buds • experience of taste. stages

• aromatic particles diffuse in the air and enter the nostrils. • these aromatic particles dissolve in the mucus inside the nostrils. • • • isn ’ t there a possibility of not sensing the taste of food while suffering from common cold? discuss. to detect smell we have discussed olfactory receptors in the beginning of the unit. how do we detect smell? analyse figure 2. 14 and complete the stages in the process of detecting smell in sequential order. 36 touch receptor pressure receptor temperature receptor pain receptor cold receptor figure 2. 15 receptors in the skin receptors in the skin you might have seen visually impaired people reading braille by touching with the tips of fingers. are these touch receptors uniformly distributed all over the skin? let us do this activity.

take two refillers of any ball point pen. ask your friend to close his / her eyes and stretch his / her hand. place the two pointed tips of the refillers on the finger tip first and then on the wrist of your friend. ask your friend about the experience he / she has felt on the finger tip and the wrist. is there any difference in the experiences? if so, what might be the reason? can you now make out how visually impaired people read braille script using their finger tips? observe figure 2. 15 and understand the various receptors present in the skin to sense the different stimuli. receptors in various organisms all organisms have mechanisms to know their surroundings. the receptors of certain organisms and their peculiarities are included

in illustration 2. 5. observe it and add your inferences in the science diary. 37 planaria eye spot to detect light. shark lateral line there are receptors in the lateral line on either side of the body which help to detect the change in the balance of body. jacobson ’ s organ the aromatic particles that stick on the tongue of the snake reach jacobson ' s organ seen on the roof of the mouth cavity. the olfactory receptors seen there get stimulated then. snake housefly ommatidia formed of thousands of small eyes. the eye of an insect consists of a cluster of photoreceptors called ommatidia. illustration 2. 5 receptors in various organisms highly sensitive olfactory receptors. 1. select the right answer from the following : while viewing nearby objects. ( a ) ciliary muscles relax

( b ) curvature of lens decreases ( c ) ciliary muscles contract ( d ) focal length increases 2. identify the odd one and write down the common feature of the others. malleus, eustachian tube, stapes, incus now, have you understood that organisms recognise their surroundings with the help of the receptors present in the sense organs? this helps them to satisfy their needs and survive on this earth. 38 3. redraw the figure. identify the parts according to the hints and label them. a. the part where the muscles that regulate the size of the pupil are seen. b. jelly like fluid. c. the layer of eye where photoreceptors are seen. 4. figure of ear is given. redraw it and name and label the parts mentioned. a ) part that receives the vibrations of the ear drum. b ) the tube that connects the pharynx.

c ) part where the auditory receptors are seen. • conduct a seminar in class on the topic ' eye diseases and protection of the eye '. • prepare notes on the peculiarities of sense organs of different organisms by collecting more information. did you notice the conversation between neenu and seena about the picture on the science club notice board? haven ' t you heard of hormones? which are the hormones you know? list them. • • • how is it that there is so much difference in height between the two? teacher said that it is a hormone related issue. 40 illustration 3. 1 hormone in the target cell cells hormone molecules hormone molecule in the receptor of cell membrane hormone receptor in the cell membrane blood the endocrine system is an organ system that controls and

coordinates all activities in the body. this system includes endocrine glands and their secretions called hormones. hormones are chemical messengers that regulate cellular activities. endocrine glands do not have particular ducts to carry hormones to various tissues. hence they are known as ductless glands. hormones are transported through blood. do the hormones transported through blood function in all cells? observe the description and illustration 3. 1 given below and discuss on the basis of indicators. note down the inference in the science diary. hormones to target cells hormones reach every cell in the body as they are transported by blood. but each hormone acts only upon those cells which have specific receptors. the cells which are acted upon by hormones are their target cells.

only those cells having specific receptors can receive a specific hormone. each hormone molecule binds with the receptor to form a hormone - receptor complex. following this, enzymes are activated within the cell and certain changes occur in cellular activities. 41 islets of langerhans figure 3. 1 pancreas alpha cells beta cells indicators • target cells. • formation of hormone - receptor complex. • influence of hormone in target cells. let ’ s learn about the various hormones in our body in detail. after digestion you have learnt that glucose molecules formed as a result of digestion get absorbed into the blood. these glucose molecules must reach cells to produce energy. the gland called pancreas plays a major role in this activity. have you tried to understand

the role of pancreas in the digestive process? observe figure 3. 1 pancreas is the gland that is connected to the duodenum, the continuation of the stomach. the beta cells in the cell cluster of this gland called islets of langerhans, produce the hormone insulin and alpha cells produce the hormone glucagon. analyse illustration 3. 2 and understand the action of these hormones. 42 production of glucagon. production of insulin level of glucose in blood 70 - 110 mg / 100 ml high low production of glucagon. production of insulin the normal level of glucose in blood is 70 - 110mg / 100ml. the level of glucose in blood is maintained by the combined action of insulin and glucagon. complete illustration 3. 3 by including the production of hormones that regulate the level of glucose.

illustration 3. 3 method of regulation of blood glucose level cellular uptake of glucose molecules. converts glucose into glycogen in the liver and muscles. insulin converts the glycogen stored in the liver to glucose. synthesizes glucose from amino acids. glucagon illustration 3. 2 action of insulin and glucagon 43 when insulin fails how does the deficiency of insulin or the inability of cells to use insulin affect the body? discuss. based on the indicators, analyse the description given below and write notes in the science diary. decreased production of insulin due to the destruction of beta cells or the inability of cells to utilize the insulin produced, raises the level of glucose in blood. excess glucose in the blood is expelled through urine. normally, there is no

glucose in urine. diabetes is clinically referred to as a condition when the level of glucose before breakfast is above 126mg / 100ml of blood. increased appetite and thirst and frequent urination are the major symptoms of diabetes. the blood test that precisely determines the level of glucose in blood for three months plays a crucial role in the diagnosis of diabetes. indicators • the reason for increase in the level of glucose in blood. • symptoms of diabetes and diagnosis. plan and conduct benedict test to detect the presence of glucose in urine with the help of your teacher. write the report in the science diary. take 2ml of the sample in a test tube. add 2ml benedict solution into it. heat for 2 minutes. observe the change in colour. formulate your

inference by comparing the glucose indicator on the reagent bottle. diabetes the reason for type i diabetes is the defective production of insulin. the reason for this is the destruction of pancreatic beta cells by t lymphocytes, a kind of white blood cells. providing insulin in proper quantity is the treatment method. the reason for type 2 diabetes is the inability of target cells to make use of insulin. obesity and gene defects are the reasons for this disease. this can be controlled through exercise, control of food and use of medicines, if necessary. the world health organisation ( who ) and international diabetic federation jointly observes november 14 as world diabetes day every year. its purpose is to create awareness against the increase in diabetes. blue circle is its logo. 44

thyroid test since the activities of the thyroid gland are extensive, disorders of thyroid should be detected through test. disorders are detected by testing the quantity of hormones directly secreted by the thyroid gland and by testing the quantity of certain other hormones that influence the thyroid gland. laboratory tests that determine the level of hormones like t3, t4, tsh are used for this. figure 3. 2 thyroid gland regulation of metabolism the anabolic and catabolic processes taking place in the body are commonly referred as metabolism. metabolic activities are also under the control of hormones. the thyroid gland is the main endocrine gland that controls the metabolic activities. observe figure 3. 2 and find out the position of the thyroid gland.

the thyroid gland secretes two hormones – thyroxine and calcitonin. pay attention to the functions of thyroxine listed below : • increases energy production. • raises the rate of metabolism. • accelerates the growth and development of the brain in the foetal stage and infancy. • regulates growth in children. how does the rise or fall of the thyroxine level affect the body? analyse the description given below on the basis of indicators and prepare notes in the science diary. hypothyroidism this is a condition in which the production of thyroxine decreases. the decrease in production of thyroxine during the foetal stage or infancy, hinders proper physical and mental development. this condition is cretinism. prolonged deficiency of thyroxine in adults leads to a

condition called myxoedema. low metabolic rate, sluggishness, increase in body weight, hypertension, inflammation in body tissues are the major symptoms of this disorder. cretinism myxoedema hyperthyroidism this is a condition in which all life activities controlled by thyroxine accelerate due to the continuous and excessive production of thyroxine. high metabolic rate, rise in body temperature, excessive sweating, increased heart beat, weight loss, emotional imbalance are the major symptoms. 45 level of calcium in blood 9 - 11 mg / 100ml thyroid gland secretes calcitonin parathyroid gland secretes parathormone. increasesdecreases regulates the level illustration 3. 4 regulation of level of calcium in blood • prevents the process of mixing of calcium from bones to blood.

• stores the excess calcium from blood to bones. • reabsorbs calcium from kidneys to blood. • prevents the storage of calcium in bones. goitre iodine is essential for the production of thyroxine. the production of thyroxine is blocked in the absence of iodine. in an attempt to produce more thyroxine, the thyroid gland enlarges. this condition is called goitre. indicators • the importance of thyroxine in controlling life activities. • the problems caused by excessive production of thyroxine. • the disabilities due to thyroxine deficiency. • the relation between iodine and thyroid gland. regulation of level of calcium the normal level of calcium in blood is 9 - 11 mg / 100ml. when the level of calcium in blood increases, the thyroid gland secretes

a hormone named calcitonin. it lowers the level of calcium in blood. what happens if there is a decrease in the level of calcium in blood? the parathyroid gland situated behind the thyroid gland secretes a hormone called parathormone. this hormone increases the level of calcium in blood. the action of parathormone and calcitonin is antagonistic. analyse illustration 3. 4 showing how the action of these hormones maintains the level of calcium in blood. prepare notes. figure 3. 4 parathyroid gland figure 3. 3 goitre 46 cortisol : the synthesis of glucose from protein and fat. slows down the action of defense cells. controls inflammation and allergy. aldosterone : maintains the salt - water level by acting in kidneys. maintains blood pressure. sex hormones : controls the development and

functions of sex organs. epinephrine ( adrenaline ) : acts along with the symp athetic nervous system during emergency. thus, we can resist or withdraw ourselves from such situations. norepinephrine ( noradrenaline ) : acts along with epinephrine. illustration 3. 5 hormones secreted by the adrenal gland outer cortex inner medulla during emergencies the hormones secreted by the adrenal gland equip the body to act during emergencies. prepare notes on the position and peculiarities of the gland using illustration 3. 5 and indicators. - the gland only upto youth! thymus is an endocrine gland situated behind the sternum. this gland is very active during infancy but constricts as we reach puberty. this gland produces a hormone called thymosin. it is also known as

' youth hormone '. the major function of this gland is to control the activities and maturation of t lymphocytes which help to impart immunity. indicators • position and parts of the adrenal gland. • hormonal actions that overcome emergency situations. • hormones produced by the cortex and their functions. the action of epinephrine and norepinephrine prolongs body activities for a longer time, when the sympathetic system gets stimulated. this hormone activity is an example for the coordinated activity of the nervous system and the endocrine system. figure 3. 5 thymus 47 figure 3. 7 pituitary gland hypothalamus posterior lobe of pituitary anterior lobe of pituitary nerve fibreportal vein pineal gland figure 3. 6 pineal gland biological clock sleeping and waking up are examples for rhythmic

bodily activities. these kinds of activities are controlled by the pineal gland, seen at the centre of the brain. melatonin, the hormone produced by this gland helps to maintain the rhythm of our daily activities. the production of melatonin is high at night and low during the day. how does the presence of melatonin influence sleep and waking up? discuss and write down the inferences. this hormone also controls the reproductive activities of organisms that have definite reproductive periods. behind growth growth of the body takes place under the control of hormones. the pituitary gland produces the hormone responsible for growth. analyse figure 3. 7 and write down the structure and position of the pituitary gland in the science diary. 48

the hormone that promotes growth of the body during its growth phase is the growth hormone ( somatotropin ). analyse the description given below and draw inferences on how the variation in the production of this hormone affects growth. if the production of somatotropin increases during the growth phase, it leads to the excessive growth of the body. this condition is called gigantism. it leads to another stage called dwarfism when its production decreases during the growth phase. acromegaly is the condition caused by the excessive production of somatotropin after the growth phase. it is characterised by the growth of the bones on the face, jaws and fingers. the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland produces hormones which regulate the functions of other endocrine glands. these are tropic

hormones. hence, the pituitary gland has great significance in the endocrine system. analyse table 3. 1 showing the hormones produced by the anterior lobe of the pituitary and write down the inferences in the science diary. figure 3. 9 an acromegaly affected person figure 3. 8 dwarfism and gigantism hormones secreted by the anterior functionlobe of the pituitary gland table 3. 1 thyroid stimulating hormone ( tsh ) adreno cortico tropic hormone ( acth ) gonado tropic hormone ( gth ) growth hormone ( gh ) somato tropic hormone ( sth ) prolactin stimulates the activity of the thyroid gland. stimulates the activity of adrenal cortex. stimulates the activity of testes in males and ovaries in females. promotes the growth of the body. production of milk. 49 raises the quantity of urine.

normal level of water in blood production of vasopressin increases decreases the production of vasopressin increases the reabsorption of water in the kidneys. decreases increases maintains the level of water illustration 3. 6 maintenance of the level of water in blood lowers the quantity of urine. decreases the reabsorption of water in the kidneys. hormone function • facilitates child birth by stimulating the oxytocin contraction of smooth muscles in the uterine wall. • facilitates lactation. vasopressin or anti diuretic • helps in the reabsorption of water in the hormone ( adh ) kidney. table 3. 2 childbirth, breast feeding, maintenance of water balance the hormones oxytocin and vasopressin, which are secreted from the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland are produced by special

neuro secretory cells of the hypothalamus. the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland stores these hormones and releases into blood when required. analyse figure 3. 7, and table 3. 2 and prepare notes. vasopressin regulates the level of water in the body through the reabsorption of water in kidneys. based on the indicators, discuss illustration 3. 6 given below and write notes in the science diary. the production of vasopressin is high in the summer season during which water loss is excessive through sweat. but its production is less during the winter and rainy season. find out the reason for the change in quantity of urine expelled during the summer and rainy season? 50 estrogen controls secondary sexual characters, ovulation, menstrual cycle etc. progesterone

controls ovulation, menstrual cycle and implantation of embryo in the uterus. testosterone controls secondary sexual characters ( change in voice, growth of hair, development of reproductive organs ) and sperm production. illustration 3. 7 sex hormones ovary testis how does decrease in the secretion of vasopressin affect the body? note down your assumption. when the production of vasopressin decreases, the reabsorption of water in the kidney is decreased and excess amount of urine is eliminated. this condition is known as diabetes insipidus. frequent urination, increased thirst etc., are the symptoms. indicators • the function of vasopressin in kidneys. • production of vasopressin and quantity of urine. • diabetes insipidus. behind sexual characteristics

the ovary and testis secrete sex hormones. analyse illustration 3. 7 and prepare a table by including hormones, centre of production and function. prime controller hypothalamus, a part of the brain is an endocrine gland too. it controls the pituitary gland and thereby other endocrine glands. based on the indicators, analyse illustration 3. 8 and write down inferences in the science diary. 51 illustration 3. 8 the relation between hypothalamus and pituitary gland inhibits the production of tropic hormones in the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland. hypothalamus stimulates the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and secretes tropic hormones. inhibitory hormone releasing hormone the hypothalamus controls the pituitary gland and thereby the

entire endocrine system by producing a variety of releasing hormones and inhibitory hormones. indicators • action of releasing hormone. • action of inhibitory hormone. • action of hypothalamus as prime controller. chemical messages for communication haven ’ t you noticed ants moving in a line along a particular trail? the reason behind this movement is the production of certain chemical substances. such chemical substances that are secreted by certain animals to the surroundings to facilitate communication are called pheromones. pheromones help in attracting mates, informing the availability of food, determining the path of travel, signalling dangers etc. the chemical messages of pheromones also help honey bees and termites to live in colonies.

the muscone in the musk deer, the civeton in the civet cat, bombykol in the female silk worm moth etc., are examples for pheromones. artificial pheromones are used for pest control in agricultural fields. 52 auxin cell growth, cell elongation, promoting the growth of terminal buds, fruit formation. cytokinin cell growth, cell division, cell differentiation. gibberellin stimulates break down of stored food to facilitate germination, sprouting of leaves illustration 3. 9 plant hormones abscisic acid dormancy of embryo, dropping of ripened leaves and fruits. ethylene ripening of leaves and fruits, excess amount of ethylene causes dropping of leaves and fruits. plants too have hormones plant hormones control and coordinate life activities in plants.

these are also called plant growth regulators. observe illustration 3. 9 which shows plant hormones and their functions. complete table 3. 3 suitably. 53 hormones also make the fruits seedless seedless orange, grape and watermelon are produced by using artificial auxin. this process of formation of fruit from the ovary without fertilization is called parthenocarpy. gibberellins also lead to parthenocarpy. artificial auxins like naphthelene acetic acid ( naa ), indol butyric acid ( iba ) etc., are used to prevent the dropping of premature fruits and for the sprouting of roots. 2, 4 - d ( 2, 4 - dichloro phenoxy acetic acid ) is used as a weedicide. artificial plant hormones plant hormones are synthesized artificially by identifying the chemical structure of the

hormones. use of such hormones has contributed a lot to the progress of the agricultural sector. let us familiarise ourselves with some such artificial plant hormones. auxins it is used in the agricultural field to prevent the dropping of premature fruits, for the sprouting of roots and as a weedicide. gibberellins it is used for increasing fruit size in grapes and apple and also for preventing ripening of fruits to assist marketing. plant hormones function auxin abscisic acid break down of stored food in the seed helps in the ripening of fruits table 3. 3 ethylene ethylene is used for the flowering of pineapple plants at a time and for the ripening of tomato, lemon, orange etc. ethyphon, a chemical which is available in liquid form, gets transformed into

ethylene, when used in rubber trees and it increases the production of latex. abscisic acid it is used for harvesting fruits at the same time. 54 1. identify the word - pair relationship and fill in the blank. thyroxine : thyroid gland epinephrine : … … … … … … … 2. analyse the information given in the box and answer the questions. x - the production of this hormone is more in night and less in day time. y - hormones from the adrenal gland work along with the sympathetic system. ( a ) identify and name the hormone ' x ' and its gland. ( b ) identify the hormones indicated as ' y '. by now, you are familiar with plant hormones too. it is a fact that the uncontrolled use of these chemicals causes many health and environmental issues. hormones play a major role in the control and co -

ordination of life activities. they are the chemical messages that help to maintain the homeostasis of body activities. the nervous system and endocrine system work along with each other to ensure homeostasis in animals. 55 adrenal testes hypothalamus pituitary thyroid pancreas ovaries ( in females ) pineal parathyroid thymus gland location hormones 3. analyse the illustration and complete the table appropriately. 56 4. the hormone that helps in the reabsorption of water in the kidneys. ( a ) tsh ( b ) acth ( c ) adh ( d ) gth • conduct a seminar on the topic – the role of the endocrine system in maintaining homeostasis. • conduct a debate on ' use of artificial plant hormones - problems and possibilities '. • collect information about novel laboratory tests related to

diagnosis of diabetes and conduct an exhibition on world diabetes day. kerala withstood the incomparable floods with unity. what threatended the state again, soon after the great floods? analyse the news reports and present the findings. $ $ 58 illustration 4. 1 modes of transmission of diseases by contact contaminated food and water cough, sneezing unsterilized equipments cloth vectors what are the reasons for the spread of diseases in such situations? discuss. c onditions suitable for the multiplication and transmission of pathogens exist in abundance and this may cause the spread of various communicable diseases. most of the pathogens are microorganisms. microorganisms and diseases you have learnt that there are many microorganisms that are useful

to humans. but some of them are pathogens. expand the list given below by including pathogenic microorganisms. • bacteria • • • not only humans, but other animals and plants are also affected by these pathogens. how are pathogens transmitted from one person to another? analyse illustration 4. 1 given below and formulate inferences. 59 figure 4. 1 leptospira bacteria collect information on other modes of transmission of diseases and expand the illustration. identify various methods for the prevention of communicable diseases, prepare a similar illustration and exhibit it in the classroom. a possible disease that may spread in flood affected areas is rat fever. analyse the information given below on the cause, mode of transmission and preventive measures of

rat fever and write notes in the sicence diary. rat fever ( leptospirosis ) rat fever is a bacterial disease. bacteria is a prokaryote. they enter the body and multiply through binary fission. the toxins produced by them destroy cells and cause disease. leptospira is the bacteria that causes rat fever. the bacteria that comes out through the urine of rat, dog and certain other animals remain alive in stagnant water and moisture. when bacteria reach blood through wounds, they affect body cells and produce certain toxins. they cause damage to blood capillaries which in turn leads to internal bleeding. severe fever, headache, muscle precautions after flood the department of health has given numerous instructions to avoid health issues that may arise after overcoming the emergency

situations. drinking boiled water and water purified using enough quantity of chlorine prevents water borne diseases. as there is a chance for the multiplication of mosquitoes in stagnant water, proper measures to check increase in mosquitoes should be adopted. for controlling diseases like rat fever, eliminate the vectors and take preventive medicines as per the directions of experts. disease affected persons must undergo diagnostic tests to confirm their illness and should take proper medicines. people living in unsafe places must shift to safe places as per instructions. ensure personal hygiene and environmental hygiene at the rehabilitation centres and create an atmosphere to protect health. 60 figure 4. 2 coating in the throat caused by diphtheria bacteria

pain, redness in eyes, etc. are the major symptoms. rat fever can be completely cured through early diagnosis and treatment. the realization that immunization is better than treatment is very important to stop the spread of disease. what are the measures to be taken to prevent the transmission of rat fever? discuss and present suggestions. bacteria cause many other diseases like rat fever. other bacterial diseases diphtheria diphtheria spreads through cough, sneezing or directly from the infected person to another person. analyse the information and figure 4. 2 related to diphtheria and prepare a table including the pathogen, symptoms and treatment for the disease. diphtheria affects the mucus membrane of the nose and the throat. corynebacterium diphtheriae is the pathogen. toxins produced

by the bacteria cause fever, throat pain and inflammation in the lymph glands of the throat. cells in the mucus membrane which are destroyed by the toxins produce an ash coloured thick coating in the throat within two or three days. gradually brain, heart and kidneys are affected. antitoxins which act against the toxins are used to protect the uninfected cells. but, if the disease becomes severe the patient cannot be recovered through medication. so vaccination is the best preventive method. 61 medicine for nipah virus arrived medicine for nipah virus arrived medicine for nipah virus arrived medicine for nipah virus arrived medicine for nipah virus arrived nipah spreads as a scarenipah spreads as a scarenipah spreads as a scarenipah spreads as a scarenipah spreads as a scare

pathogen mycobacterium tuberculosis. major symptoms loss of body weight, fatigue, persistent cough transmission of disease when the patient speaks, coughs or sneezes, the pathogens spread into the air and thereby to others. treatment by administering antibiotics vaccine bcg is used as preventive vaccine against tuberculosis. organs / body parts affected tuberculosis mainly affects the lungs. but kidneys, bones, joints, brain etc. are also affected by this disease. tuberculosis tuberculosis was a dreadful disease earlier. analyse the information given below and prepare a wall magazine on the main points relating to tuberculosis. prepare a chart based on the information collected on the national tuberculosis prevention programme and exhibit it in the class.

collect additional information on other bacterial diseases and their mode of transmission and prepare a table. exhibit it in the class. viral diseases haven ’ t you noticed the news reports? nipah was the most fatal of the diseases that kerala faced recently. this is a viral disease. analyse illustration 4. 2 and find out how nipah virus causes the disease. based on the indicators, prepare notes in the science diary. virus virus has the simple structure with a dna or rna molecule within a protein coat. virus has no cell organelles as seen in normal cells. hence virus multiplies by taking control over the genetic mechanism of the host cells. viruses infect not only human beings but also plants, other animals and even bacteria. 62 illustration 4. 2 nipah virus and transmission of the disease

fruit eating bats as the nipah virus vectors pigs remains of fruits eaten by bats nipah viruses saliva and urine of bats saliva and urine of bats figure 4. 3 hiv aids aids ( acquired immuno deficiency syndrome ) is a dreadful disease that has gripped the world by fear. lymphocytes play a major role in providing immunity to the body. hiv ( human immuno deficiency virus ) enters the body and multiplies using the genetic mechanism of lymphocytes. hence the number of lymphocytes decreases considerably and reduces the immunity of the body. various other pathogens which enter the body in such a situation make the condition of aids even more fatal. indicators • natural vector of nipah virus. • situations that enable the virus to enter humans.

haven ’ t you heard of aids? a note on this disease is given below. on the basis of the indicators, discuss the note and write your inferences in the science diary. 63 through sexual contact with hiv infected person from hiv infected mother to the foetus by sharing needle and syringe contaminated with hiv components through the reception of blood and organs contaminated with hiv illustration 4. 3 mode of transmission of aids indicators • how does hiv multiply in the human body? • the number of lymphocytes and aids. • condition that makes aids fatal. what are the ways by which one gets infected with hiv? write your inferences in the science diary by analysing illustration 4. 3 given below. aids does not spread. • by touch, shaking hands, coughing, sneezing etc.

• through insects like mosquitoes, houseflies etc. • by staying together and sharing food. • by using the same toilet. • by taking bath in the same pond. should we be scared of aids patients? what should be our attitude towards them? discuss. hepatitis hepatitis is a liver disease. hepatitis is also caused by virus. inflammation of the liver is its major symptom. when the flow of bile secreted by the liver is blocked, an increase in the level of bile pigment called bilirubin in blood is noticed. this imparts dark yellow colour to the 64 figure 4. 4 fungal diseases ringworm athletes ' foot dandruff when dead cells fall off, skin cells are continuously regenerated. at times the cells divide faster than falling off and become scales. this condition is dandruff. certain

fungi that affect the skin at this time cause itching and other infections. the scales may fall off as white dusts and may cause loss of hair. mucus membrane, white portion of the eyes and the nails. this is the external symptom of the disease. disease gets transmitted through contaminated food and water, blood components and excreta of the patient. certain hepatitis do get transmitted in the same way as the transmission of hiv. discuss the preventive measures of this disease and present your inferences. hepatitis can also occur due to reasons other than virus infection. collect more information about such reasons. dengue fever and chikunguya that are common in kerala are also viral diseases. these diseases are transmitted through mosquitoes. discuss the precautions to be taken

to prevent the transmission of these diseases. collect information on other viral diseases and their modes of transmission and prepare a table. exhibit it in the class. fungal diseases fungi are of various types. some fungi are pathogenic. the toxins produced by the fungi cause diseases. analyse figure 4. 4 and the description on some fungal diseases that affect human beings and prepare a table enlisting the diseases, symptoms and modes of transmission. ringworm is a skin disease caused by certain types of fungi. the disease manifests as round, red blisters on the skin. this disease spreads through contact. athletes ’ foot is a fungal infection which manifests on the sole of the foot and between the toes. appearance of reddish scaly rashes

that cause itching is the major symptom. pathogens enter through the toes when they come in contact with contaminated water and soil. 65 pathogen plasmodium vector female anopheles mosquito host human illustration 4. 4 malarial infection diseases caused by protozoa protozoans are unicellular eukaryotes. malaria is an example of a disease caused by protozoa. prepare a note by analysing illustration 4. 4 and the information give on malaria. high fever with shivering and profuse sweating are the major symptoms of malaria. other symptoms include headache, vomitting, diarrhoea, anaemia, etc. worms as pathogens filariasis is caused by filarial worms that are spread by culex mosquitoes. the worms stay in the lymph ducts and obstruct the

flow of lymph by blocking the ducts. this causes swelling in the lymph ducts. polluted surroundings promote the multiplication of pathogens. the increase in the number of vectors like mosquitoes, houseflies etc leads to the spread of communicable diseases much beyond control. in order to control the spread of communicable diseases, it is necessary to avoid situations that lead to the multiplication of pathogens and vectors. it is our duty to keep our surroundings clean. what is the significance of observing ' dry day ' in schools and at home? discuss. 66 geneticdeficiency of nutrients lifestyle diseases illustration 4. 5 non - communicable diseases occupational occupational diseases occupational diseases are caused by situations in work sites. some examples for occupational diseases

are given below. : pneumoconiosis, affecting the labourers engaged in coal mining ; silicosis, affecting mining workers related to gold, tin, mica and labourers in quarry ; pottery and ceramics. asbestosis, affecting workers in asbestos factories. nonpathogenic diseases are diseases caused only by pathogens? are they caused by other factors too? observe illustration 4. 5. have you learnt about diseases caused by the deficiency of nutrients? let ’ s examine other reasons and conditions that cause diseases. genetic diseases genetic diseases are caused by defects in the genes that control the cellular activities. haemophilia, sickle cell anaemia, etc. are examples of genetic diseases. haemophilia blood clots with the help of some proteins present in

blood plasma. what will happen when the genes that control protein synthesis become defective? discuss. haemophilia is the condition in which excess blood is lost even through minor wounds. as haemophilia is a genetic disease, a complete cure is not possible at present. temporary relief is brought in by identifying and injecting the deficient protein. 67 red blood cells bend like sickle. the oxygen carrying capacity of red blood cells decreases. the sickle shaped rbcs get collected in the blood vessels and block the flow of blood in them. illustration 4. 6 sickle cell anaemia changes occur in the structure of haemoglobin in red blood cells. there are social organisations which work for haemophilia patients who need special care and attention. these organisations

volunteer to provide adequate care to haemophilia patients and make their relatives and the public aware of it. sickle cell anaemia the defects in genes may also cause deformities in the sequencing of amino acids which are the building blocks of haemoglobin. as a result of this, the structure of haemoglobin changes and this in turn decreases its oxygen carrying capacity. observe the changes that occur in the red blood cells of sickle cell anaemia patients given in illustration 4. 6. write your inferences in the science diary based on the indicators given. indicators • why do haemophilia patients lose blood excessively, even through minor wounds? • how does the deformity of red blood cells in sickle cell anaemia patients affect their body? cancer

cancer is caused by the uncontrolled division of cells and their spread to other tissues. the normal cells get transformed into cancerous cells when the control system of cell division fails. this may be due to environmental factors, smoking, radiations, virus, hereditary factors, etc. the disease may become complicated with 68 illustration 4. 7 cancer cells normal cells cancer cells india - the world capital of diabetes hypertension - the silent killer lack of exercise – the main reasonfor increase in cardiac diseases changes in food habits : the number of obese people on the rise the spread of cancer cells to other parts of the body through blood and lymph. don ' t these newspaper reports point to the ill effects of unhealthy life styles? surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy

etc., are extensively used in the treatment of cancer. as recovery from the disease is difficult if the disease becomes severe, early diagnosis of the disease is crucial in the treatment of cancer. discuss with cancer specialists about the life style and food habits that will help us to get rid of cancer. also collect more information in this regard from other sources. what is the importance of voluntary organisations that offer palliative care to cancer patients? love and care are as important as food and medicines. discuss. look at the collage. cancer and kerala the studies conducted by the regional cancer center in thiruvananthapuram has revealed that every year there are more than 50, 000 newly affected cancer patients in kerala and about 20 percent of cancer are due to some

components in food. 50 percent of cancer among males are related to mouth, throat and lungs. the main reasons identified for this are smoking and alcoholism. though the rate of infected persons are increasing, the number of people recovering from the disease is also on a steady increase. even though cancer is a genetic disease, it is not considered as a hereditary disease. 69 table 4. 1 different lifestyle diseases disease cause diabetes deficiency of insulin or its malfunctioning fatty liver deposition of excess fat in the liver stroke rupture of blood vessels in the brain, block of blood flow hypertension decrease in the diameter of arteries due to deposition of fat heart attack block of blood flow due to deposition of fat in coronary arteries which carry blood to the heart. • stroke

• addiction to nicotine • lung cancer • bronchitis • emphysema • hypertension • loss of elasticity of arteries • decrease in functional efficiency illustration 4. 8 smoking and health hazards lifestyle diseases lifestyle diseases are caused by unhealthy living styles. the changes in food habits, lack of physical exercise, mental stress, bad habits like consumption of alcohol, drug abuse, smoking, etc. lead to various lifestyle diseases. analyse table 4. 1 about certain lifestyle diseases and conduct a classroom presentation on healthy habits to be followed to avoid such diseases. observe illustration 4. 8 on some of the health problems associated with smoking. 70 table 4. 2 some animal diseases disease pathogen anthrax, inflammation of udder bacteria

foot and mouth disease virus pathogen disease blight disease in paddy, bacteria wilt disease in brinjal virus mosaic disease in peas and tapioca, bunchy top of banana fungus quick wilt in pepper, bud rot of coconut. table 4. 3 some plant diseases collect more information on the bad effects of smoking and write it in your science diary. conduct a poster exhibition to make people aware of drug abuse. animal diseases not only human beings, but animals are also affected by diseases. observe table 4. 2 about some animal diseases. elaborate the table by including details of other animal diseases. plant diseases plants are also affected by various diseases. examine table 4. 3 to identify some of the plant diseases caused by microorganisms like

bacteria, virus and fungi. collect more information on plant diseases that adversely affect food production and write it in your science diary. you may also make use of agricultural publications for collecting additional information. 71 try to understand the problems faced by farmers in your locality and participate in preventive activities against plant diseases. the state of complete physical, mental and social well - being of a person is called health. healthy people are the real wealth of a society. the attitude towards patients is as important as keeping away from diseases by practising healthy habits. it is our duty to console those who are affected by noncurable and fatal diseases. 1. which among the following is not a bacterial disease? a. tuberculosis b. nipah

c. diphtheria d. anthrax 2. “ food safety will be adversely affected with the spread of plant diseases. ” a. do you agree with this statement? why? b. give two examples of plant diseases. 3. prepare a pamphlet including the major measures to be taken to prevent rat fever. 4. what is the importance of vaccination in preventing diphtheria? 5. what health habits should be adopted to prevent lifestyle diseases? • prepare a check list and collect information on various lifestyle diseases. find out the lifestyle diseases that are observed commonly. • prepare and exhibit posters highlighting the fact that social hygiene is as important as personal hygiene. constitution of india part iv a fundamental duties of citizens article 51 a

fundamental duties - it shall be the duty of every citizen of india : ( a ) to abide by the constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the national flag and the national anthem ; ( b ) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom ; ( c ) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of india ; ( d ) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so ; ( e ) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of india transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities ; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women ; ( f ) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture ;

( g ) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers, wild life and to have compassion for living creatures ; ( h ) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform ; ( i ) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence ; ( j ) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievements ; ( k ) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between age of six and fourteen years. forests have a great role in conserving the health of the environment in which we live. forests are decisive in many respects. source of the water we drink and the air we breathe,

balancing atmospheric temperature, determining weather, managing agriculture, source of our food etc., are some of those areas. wild animals inhabit forests. each animal has a function to perform in the environment in which it lives. thus wild animals have a vital role in aspects like pollination of plants, dispersal of seeds, sustenance of forests etc. it is our duty to protect and preserve forests, lakes, rivers, wild animals etc, which are all part of our nature. also, article 51 ( g ) of our constitution reminds every citizen of india to have a compassion for living creatures. activities taken up for the conservation of forests and wild life by the forest department : • establishing forestry clubs in schools, for spreading knowledge about forests.

• establishing eco - tourism centres as a part of encouraging eco - friendly tourism. • conducting nature study camps as a part of forest and wild life education. • making public places green. • providing financial aid to conserve ' kaavu '. • turtle conservation project. • instituting ' vanamitra award ' for promoting creative contributions in the field of green projects. • instituting ' prakritimitra award ' for conserving habitats outside forests and biodiversity. • conducting the ' citizen conservator programme ' for ensuring the role of public in forest conservation. toll free number of forest department : 18004254733 its high time we protected nature and natural resources ….! nt - 885 - 1 - biology - 10 - ( e ) - vol - 2 the national anthem jana - gana - mana adhinayaka, jaya he bharatha - bhagya - vidhata.

punjab - sindh - gujarat - maratha dravida - utkala - banga vindhya - himachala - yamuna - ganga uchchala - jaladhi - taranga tava subha name jage, tava subha asisa mage, gahe tava jaya gatha. jana - gana - mangala - dayaka jaya he bharatha - bhagya - vidhata. jaya he, jaya he, jaya he, jaya jaya jaya, jaya he! pledge india is my country. all indians are my brothers and sisters. i love my country, and i am proud of its rich and varied heritage. i shall always strive to be worthy of it. i shall give respect to my parents, teachers and all elders and treat everyone with courtesy. i pledge my devotion to my country and my people. in their well - being and prosperity alone lies my happiness. state council of educational research and training ( scert ) poojappura, thiruvananthapuram 695012, kerala

website : www. scertkerala. gov. in e - mail : scertkerala @ gmail. com phone : 0471 - 2341883, fax : 0471 - 2341869 typesetting and layout : scert printed at : kbps, kakkanad, kochi - 30 © department of general education, government of kerala dear students, you will be curious to know how we sense and respond to our environment through the windows of knowledge. you will certainly be surprised to learn how the human brain, nerves and hormones act together to co - ordinate the activities of the human body and the genetic secrets behind the uniqueness of living species, the recent developments in the field of biotechnology which leads to the progress in human life. the path of evolution related to the origin of humans on earth has also been

included in the book. how the wonder machine that is, the human body prevents diseases, and the precautionary measures to be followed to keep diseases away are also mentioned here. reminders on avoiding accidents caused by carelessness, incorporated with learning activities will be beneficial in your daily life. the student ’ s role is pivotal in the process of construction of knowledge. this science textbook is only a resource in the learning process. t eachers and supplementary materials will help you in the creation of knowledge. ' samagra ', the education portal and technology enabled q r code printed textbooks would definitely make your learning activity in classrooms easy and joyful. the national skills qualifications framework, the current relevance of disaster

management and the possibilities of i. c. t. have also been considered while modifying the textbook. let all this be beneficial for you in the learning of science by joyfully participating in life related learning experiences that impart knowledge and happiness. love and regards, dr. j. prasad director scert, kerala constitution of india part iv a fundamental duties of citizens article 51 a fundamental duties - it shall be the duty of every citizen of india : ( a ) to abide by the constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the national flag and the national anthem ; ( b ) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom ; ( c ) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of india ;

( d ) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so ; ( e ) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of india transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities ; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women ; ( f ) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture ; ( g ) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers, wild life and to have compassion for living creatures ; ( h ) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform ; ( i ) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence ; ( j ) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity

so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievements ; ( k ) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between age of six and fourteen years. for further reading ( evaluation not required ) let us assess extended activities certain icons are used in this textbook for convenience haven ’ t you observed the picture of people wearing protective masks in places where epidemics spread out? what are the uses of wearing masks in such situations? • prevent the entry of germs. • can such precautions prevent the entry of pathogens into the body to a certain extent? doesn ’ t our body have its own natural defense mechanisms to prevent the entry of pathogens? list them. 80 illustration 5. 1 defense mechanisms

defense mechanisms in our body body coverings and secretions ( skin, mucous membrane, mucous, saliva, tear, etc. ) body fluids ( blood, lymph ) defense is the ability of the body to prevent the entry of pathogens and to destroy those that have already entered the body. our body is well equipped with a variety of defense mechanisms. observe illustration ( 5. 1 ) and prepare a note on the defense mechanisms in our body. body coverings and secretions skin is the protective covering of the body. it is a safety shield that prevents the entry of germs. analyse figure ( 5. 1 ) and the description given below and prepare notes based on the indicators. sebaceous gland : sebum produced by the gland makes the skin oily and water proof. sweat gland : the disinfectants present in

the sweat produced by this gland destroys the germs. figure 5. 1 the skin and its defense mechanism epidermis : a protein called keratin present here prevents the entry of germs. 81 figure 5. 2 mucous membrane table 5. 1 part of the body secretion ear.. lysozyme in saliva eye.. hcl mucus in nose lysozyme in saliva mucus in trachea hcl in stomach mucus in intestine lysozyme in tears ear wax lysozyme in urine illustration 5. 2 body secretions and defense mechanisms the mucous membrane is another protective covering of body parts ( figure 5. 2 ). pathogens trapped in the mucus produced by this membrane, get destroyed. the destroyed germs are expelled out by the cilia cells of the mucous membrane. coverings of the body act as a habitat for many useful

bacteria. the germs that enter the body need to compete with such useful bacteria for shelter and nutrients. a great number of germs get destroyed in this competition. indicators • skin and defense • mucus membrane and defense you have understood that body secretions like sweat, mucus, etc. destroy germs. which are the other secretions that help to defend pathogens? analyse illustration ( 5. 2 ) and complete table ( 5. 1 ) given below. 82 defense action engulfs bacteria, synthesizes chemicals that destroy bacteria. stimulates other white blood cells. dilates the blood vessels. white blood cells neutrophil basophil eosinophil illustration 5. 3 white blood cells and defense actions engulfs and destroys germs. monocyte identifies and destroys germs specifically. lymphocyte

aren ’ t you convinced of how body coverings and secretions prevent the entry of germs? body fluids and defense body fluids like blood and lymph play an important role in defense mechanism. these body fluids follow different defense strategies like controlling the entry of germs into the body, neutralising germs and the toxic substances they produce, preventing their multiplication, etc. let us examine how blood plays its role in the defense system. blood and defense white blood cells play a significant role in defense. analyse illustration 5. 3 and prepare notes on the role of white blood cells in defense. synthesizes chemicals that destroy foreign bodies. synthesizes chemicals required for the inflammatory responses. you have understood the defense actions of white blood cells. now

let us familiarise with the different strategies of defense. 83 germs enter through wounds. chemicals are produced illustration 5. 4 inflammatory response 1 blood capillaries dilate. 2 white blood cells reach the wound site through the walls of the capillaries. 3 neutrophils and monocytes engulf and destroy germs. 4 5 inflammatory response haven ’ t you noticed that when a wound occurs, that part swells up? this is called inflammatory response. illustration ( 5. 4 ) explains how the inflammatory response takes place. analyse it with the help of indicators and description, and prepare a note on it. the cells that get damaged by a wound or by an infection produce certain chemical substances. these substances dilate the capillaries thereby increasing the blood flow. blood

plasma and more white blood cells reach the wound site. this is the reason for the swelling of the wound site. this defense mechanism is known as inflammatory response. indicators • the advantage of dilation of capillaries at the wound site. • role of white blood cells in the inflammatory response. • inflammatory response and defense. you have understood that the germs at the wound site are engulfed and destroyed by the white blood cells. how does this process take place? 84 illustration 5. 6 blood clotting thromboplastin calcium, vitamin k thrombin pathogen engulfs pathogen in the membrane sac. lysosome lysosome combines with membrane sac. the pathogens are degenerated and destroyed by the enzymes in lysosome. illustrartion 5. 5 phagocytosis phagocytosis

phagocytosis is the process of engulfing and destroying of germs. the cells that are engaged in this process are called phagocytes. ( phago - to engulf, cyte - cell ). the white blood cells, namely monocytes and neutrophils are phagocytes. analyse illustration ( 5. 5 ) and write notes on the stages of phagocytosis in the science diary. blood clotting blood clotting is also a defense mechanism. the changes that take place during blood clotting is consolidated below. analyse and understand the different stages in the process of blood clotting and prepare a note on it. • tissues and platelets at the site of wound degenerate to form the enzyme called thromboplastin. • prothrombin in plasma thrombin • fibrinogen fibrin fibres • the red blood cells and platelets get entangled in the network of fibrin

fibres to form the blood clot. 85 pathogens enter the body. the presence of toxins produced by the pathogens stimulates the white blood cells. the chemical substances produced by the white blood cells raises the body temperature. the rise in body temperature reduces the rate of multiplication of pathogens. increases the effect of phagocytosis. blood clotting helps to prevent bleeding and checks the entry of pathogens through wounds. as blood clots, the process of healing of wound also begins. healing of wounds healing of wound is a stage after inflammatory response and blood clotting. when a wound occurs new similar tissues are formed in place of the tissues damaged or lost by the wound. in such situations the wound scar does not remain. but, in cases when new similar tissues

cannot be formed, the connective tissue heals the wound. in such situations, the wound scar remains. infections through the wound slow activated partial thromboplastin time ( aptt ) aptt is the test to detect the cause of excess bleeding or lack of clotting of blood. specific reagents are added to the blood sample and the time taken for blood clotting is found out. the normal value of this test is 30 to 40 seconds. the quantity and action of the factors that help in blood clotting can be detected by this test. usually, when a wound occurs in human beings, bleeding lasts for 2 to 7 minutes and it clots within 8 to 15 minutes. down the healing process. a strong defense system accelerates the process of wound healing and reduces the chance of infection. fever, a defense mechanism

the normal body temperature is 370 c ( 98. 60f ). fever is a condition when the body temperature rises above the normal level. is it a disease or a symptom? analyse the flow chart given and write your inferences in the science diary. 86 you have understood that fever is a defense mechanism of the body. why do we take medicines during fever? read the note given below and formulate inferences. when infection becomes uncontrollable, the body temperature may rise tremendously. we take medicines to reduce the body temperature. but it is advisable to treat after diagnosing the exact reason. if the rise in body temperature persists for a long time, it may badly affect the internal organs including the brain. hence, if fever increases, it is necessary to seek medical assistance immediately.

you have understood some mechanisms that help to prevent and destroy the entry of germs. non - specific defense mechanism is a mechanism that protects us from all pathogens without considering their characteristic features. lymphocytes are the blood cells that specifically identify and destroy pathogens that enter the body by overcoming the non - specific defense mechanism of the body. lymphocytes – the warrior foreign bodies or pathogens that enter the body and stimulate the defense mechanism are called antigens. the defense mechanism that identifies the structure of each antigen and destroys it specifically is called specific defense. white blood cells known as lymphocytes are capable of destroying pathogens in this way. lymphocytes are formed in the bone

marrow and are of two types. those that mature in the bone marrow are called b lymphocytes and those that mature in the thymus gland are called t lymphocytes. analyse figure 5. 3 and description, and prepare a note on the role of lymphocytes in specific defense mechanism. b - lymphocytes b - lymphocytes produce certain proteins that act against antigens. these are called antibodies. antibodies destroy the pathogens in three different ways. 1. destroy the bacteria by disintegrating their cell membrane. 2. neutralise the toxin of the antigens. 3. destroy the pathogens by stimulating other white blood cells. b - lymphocyte t - lymphocyte figure 5. 3 87 illustration 5. 7 blood & defense mechanisms raising body temperature. blood & defense mechanisms production of antibodies healing of wounds

illustration 5. 8 lymphatic system lymph duct lymph node spleen immunoglobulin the defense chemicals produced by b lymphocytes as antibodies are known as immunoglobulins. this is a y shaped protein. there are specific sites for binding antigens at their ends. these sites help to recognise and destroy antigens specifically. there are five types of immunoglobulins such as iga, igd, ige, igg and igm. t - lymphocytes • stimulate other defense cells of the body. • destroy the cells affected by virus. • destroy cancer cells. complete illustration ( 5. 7 ) showing the defense mechanisms of blood, on the basis of the facts that you have already understood. lymph and defense you have already studied about the lymph. analyse illustration ( 5. 8 ) of the lymphatic system

and the description given. discuss how lymph helps in defense mechanisms. the lymph, formed from the blood and reabsorbed into blood has a prominent role in defense mechanisms, like the blood itself. lymph contains plenty of lymphocytes. they destroy the disease causing bacteria in lymph nodes and spleen. 88 when the body itself has defense mechanisms to prevent pathogens, why do we take vaccines? like breast milk, vaccinationtoo is the right of a new born. note the doubt of the child who observes the poster. what is vaccination? analyse the description given below and prepare notes in the science diary. defense mechanisms become slow when germs enter the body. this causes the spread and multiplication of germs. immunization is the artificial method to make the defense cells

alert against the attack of pathogens. vaccines are the substances used for artificial immunization. any one of the components from alive or dead or neutralised germs, neutralised toxins or cellular parts of the pathogens will be the component of each vaccine. these act as antigens that stimulate the defense mechanism of the body. antibodies are formed in the body against them. these antibodies are retained in the body which in future protects the body from the pathogen responsible for the same disease. edward jenner edward jenner, an english doctor started immunization in 1978. he observed that people affected by cowpox escaped from the attack of smallpox. he injected the pus taken from a cowpox patient into the body of an 8 year old boy. the boy was affected by cowpox and

recovered. after two months the pus taken from a smallpox patient was injected into the boy. he was not affected by smallpox. the immunization programmes got the name vaccination from the latin word ‘ vacca ’ meaning cow, in memory of the cowpox experiments of jenner. you have now understood the natural defense mechanisms of the body. is it possible to acquire immunity artificially? which are the methods? discuss. immunization 89 table 5. 2 indicators • significance of vaccination • components of vaccines • antigens and antibodies collect the national immunization schedule of preventive vaccines to be taken at different stages of childhood from birth. analyse it, collect more information and complete the table ( 5. 2 ). vaccine disease b. c. g. o. p. v. pentavalent m. m. r. t. t.

prepare posters highlighting the importance of immunization and exhibit them in the classrooms. treatment – final defense what will happen if no treatment is taken when infected with diseases? treatment is the final defense, isn ’ t it? which are the different methods of treatment that we depend on? • ayurveda • sidda • unani • naturopathy • • ayurveda – india ’ s own ayurveda is a famous method of treatment that has emerged from india. it is inevitable to live in harmony with nature to maintain an efficient and healthy body. in ayurveda, plant and animal products are used as medicines. 90 to understand the structure of internal organs using ultrasonic sound waves. to get three - dimensional visuals of internal organs with the help of computer, using x - rays.

to get three - dimensional visuals of internal organs. equipment electro encephalo gram ( eeg ) electro cardio gram ( ecg ) ultra sound scanner c. t. scanner ( computed tomography scanner ) mri scanner ( magnetic resonance imaging scanner ) table 5. 3 to record electric waves in the brain. to record electric waves in the heart muscle. use figure 5. 4 diagnostic equipments observe figure 5. 4 and write the name and use of the diagnostic equipments in your science diary. today, besides these familiar equipments, most modern diagnostic tools are available in the field of medicine. examine table 5. 3 and prepare a note including the pictures and details of the use of modern diagnostic tools in your science diary. in various parts of the world, methods of treatment have evolved in accordance

with the lifestyle of the people, their culture and available natural resources. siddavaidya, panchakarma, unani, naturopathy, etc. are traditional treatment methods which have evolved like this. homeopathy is the method of treatment proposed by the german doctor, sammuel haniman. hippocrates paved the way for modern medicine. he began a treatment system that discarded superstitious beliefs and emphasized only on pathogens, diagnosis and medicines. prepare a journal by collecting more information related to various systems of medicine. modern medicine is far advanced in the field of treatment. scientific advancements in diagnosis and invention of new medicines became crucial in the development of modern medicine. 91 complete blood count ( cbc ) test details test result normal value

haemoglobin 12. 2 gm 12 - 17 gm / 100 ml of / 100 ml of blood blood number of white 8, 200 / ml 5000 - 10000 blood cells of blood / ml of blood number of red 47 lakhs 45 lakhs to blood cells / ml of blood 60 lakhs / ml of blood number of 3. 2 lakhs 2. 5 lakhs to platelets / ml of blood 3. 5 lakhs / ml of blood report laboratory tests you know that laboratory tests help in the diagnosis of diseases. observe the report of a test showing the quantity of different factors in blood. collect information about different types of tests conducted in the laboratory by enquiring about it to a lab technician and record it in the science diary. advancements in technology have developed various areas of specialization in modern medicine. identify the specializations

in medicine and the related areas and complete table 5. 4. identify more areas and prepare a note on it. table 5. 4 specializations and areas specialization related area cardiology treatment of heart treatment of eye neurology cancer treatment e. n. t 92 kerala becomes a model again karsap ( kerala antimicrobial resistance strategic action plan ) submitted on october 2018, is another example for the kerala model. this action plan aims to fight against the resistance of microbes towards medicines. kerala is the first in the south east nations to launch this plan. in 2016, a form of tuberculosis, resistant to medicines affected five lakh people all over the world. who has already declared the resistive power of microorganisms as a global health crisis. when

kerala strikes a model for such a programme initiated by who, it is undoubtedly a mark of pride for the people of the state. we should also be sensible to abstain from unhealthy habits like self treatment. it was alexander fleming who first discovered antibiotics in 1928. he accidentally discovered that the fungus penicillium notatum has the ability to destroy bacteria. but it took several years to extract medicine from it. in treatment, along with diagnosis medicines also have great significance. medicines are either substances extracted from plants, animals or microorganisms or chemical substances synthesised in laboratories. antibiotics medicines that are extracted from microorganisms like bacteria, fungi, etc. and used to destroy bacteria are called antibiotics. they

can be used externally and internally. though antibiotics are effective medicines, their regular use creates many side effects. some important side effects are listed below : • regular use develops immunity in pathogens against antibiotics. • destroys useful bacteria in the body. • reduces the quantity of some vitamins in the body. antifungal medicines, are used to destroy fungi and antiviral medicines are used to control viruses. is it advisable to use antibiotics without the recommendation by a doctor? discuss and write inferences in the science diary. 93 ab c giving artificial respiration arm supported by sling removing objects stuck in trachea. people in the age group 18 - 60 can donate blood. blood donation can be done once in three months.

blood donation causes no problem to the donor ’ s health. pregnant women and breast feeding mothers should not donate blood. persons with communicable diseases ( transmitted through blood ) should not donate blood. like diseases, accidents are also challenges to health. what can we do to overcome critical conditions during accidents till we get expert treatment? first aid can ' t we save the life of victims of accidents if we give them timely first aid? discuss. observe figures a, b and c and identify the instances in which the following type of first aid is given. notice board organise an awareness class regarding first aid by utilizing the facts you have studied and after collecting more information. during accidents heavy loss of blood occurs. how can this blood

loss resolved? blood transfusion the transfer of blood from one person to another is called blood transfusion. what all things should be taken care of while transfusing blood? the instructions shown in a blood bank are given below. analyse each point and formulate inferences regarding precautions. 94 blood group a b ab o antigens antibodies a b a and b nil b a nil a and b table 5. 5 different types of blood groups can a patient receive blood from any person? why is blood group testing done prior to blood transfusion? let us examine different types of blood groups in human beings and the basic concepts behind blood group determination. analyse table ( 5. 5 ) and the description based on the indicators and prepare notes in your science diary.

the basis of blood grouping is the presence of antigen a and antigen b in red blood cells. the blood group of a person is named according to the antigen present in that person ’ s blood. in blood transfusion, certain antibodies present in the blood plasma are of special importance. in blood group a, antibody b and in group b, antibody a are present. in addition to antigens a and b, another antigen called d or rh factor is present in the cell membrane of red blood cells of certain persons. the blood groups in which rh factor is present are known as positive blood groups and those without rh factor are called negative blood groups. when a foreign antigen reaches one ’ s blood, it stimulates the defense mechanism. on receiving unmatching blood, the antigen present

in the donor ' s blood and the antibody present in the recipient ' s blood will react with each other and form a blood clot. hence, everyone cannot receive blood from all blood groups. prepare posters on the greatness of donating blood and exhibit them in your classroom. indicators • antigens and blood groups • antibodies and blood groups • rh factor 95 defense mechanism in plants bark well equipped resistant coat illustration 5. 10 complete illustration 5. 10 given below by including different defense mechanisms in plants. illustration 5. 9 defense mechanisms in plants wax covering, cuticle prevents the entry of germs through leaves. cell wall well equipped resistant coat. chemical substances such as lignin, cutin, suberin, etc. provide rigidity to the cell wall. the germs

that have crossed the cell wall are prevented from entering through the cell membrane by callose, a polysaccharide formed in the cell wall. bark protects the inner cells from direct contact of pathogens. defense mechanisms in plants as in animals, plants also have mechanisms to prevent the entry of germs and to fight against those that have already entered. in plants, defense is made possible through structural and biochemical methods. analyse illustration ( 5. 9 ) and prepare notes on defense mechanisms in plants. 96 the healthy constitution of the body depends on the healthy state of the external environment. our body is well equipped with various defense mechanisms. similarly, it is our responsibility to evolve defense mechanisms to protect our environment from factors causing diseases.

1. which among the following is not included in non - specific body defense? a. production of sebum b. action of hydrochloric acid in the stomach. c. action of b lymphocytes. d. action of lysozyme in saliva. 2. write the functions of blood cells in the defense mechanism of the body. 3. what is the basis of grouping blood into different types? everybody cannot receive blood of all blood groups. why? • conduct an interview with a doctor and collect information regarding the working of modern equipments used for diagnosing diseases and the significance of laboratory tests. prepare a wall poster and exhibit it in the classroom. • conduct a debate in the class on ' are antibiotics useful or harmful? ' • organise an awareness class regarding the significance of immunization. 97

observe the picture. you have understood that children acquire certain features from their parents. besides, don ' t the children show certain features different from their parents? find out such differences from the picture. children may inherit certain features either from their mother or father. features that are not seen in parents may also be found in children. 98 the transmission of features of parents to offsprings is termed as heredity. the features seen in offsprings that are different from their parents are called variations. the branch of science that deals with heredity and variations is called genetics. emergence of genetics the inferences formulated by a scientist named gregor johann mendel, on the basis of hybridization experiments carried out in

pea plants, led to the foundation of genetics. mendel is considered as the father of genetics. experiments of mendel observe illustration 6. 1 of the hybridization experiment conducted on the basis of two contrasting traits of the character height in pea plant. here the factors are illustrated using symbols. gregor johann mendel born in 1822 at brunn, austria ( modern czech republic ). he studied the inheritance of 7 pairs of contrasting traits in pea plants, scientifically known as pisum sativum. he formulated the laws of inheritance by analysing the inheritance of characters like height of plants, position of flower, shape of seed, colour of seed coat, colour of cotyledon, colour of fruit and shape of fruit. through his studies on inheritance, he explained that

each character is controlled by a pair of factors, which he illustrated using symbols. in 1866 his findings were published, but they failed to get due recognition. in 1884 he died. the significance of his findings was identified by research works conducted later. figure 6. 1 garden pea ( pisum sativum ) 99 indicators • the character of pea plants considered in this experiment. • the contrasting traits of this character. • the traits those were apparent and not apparent in the first generation. • difference in the factors of tall parent plant and the first generation plant. when plants that differ in a pair of contrasting traits are hybridized, only one trait is expressed while the other remains hidden in the offsprings of the first generation. the expressed trait is called dominant

trait and the hidden trait is called recessive trait. genes and alleles gregor mendel assumed that the inheritance of characteristics from parents to offsprings is by certain factors transferred through gametes. it was discovered on the basis of later studies that the factors are the genes present in the chromosomes of the nucleus. a gene that controls a character has different forms. they are called alleles. generally, a gene has two alleles. for example, t and t are the different alleles of the gene that controls the character, height. the allele t determines the trait tallness and the allele t determines the trait dwarfness. the allele that determines the dominant trait in the first generation is generally indicated by a capital letter and the allele that determines the

recessive trait is indicated by a small letter. tall tt dwarf tt gametes illustration 6. 1 hybridization parental plants tall first generation ( f1 ) tt t t 100 self pollination of first generation plant tall.. tall tt xtt tt. tt. tt illustration 6. 2 self pollination of first generation plant second generation ( f2 ) gametes t t.. the fact that no intermediate plants were formed by the hybridization of tall and dwarf plants, and the factor responsible for dwarfness remaining hidden persuaded mendel to continue with his experiments. he self pollinated the first generation plant to understand what happened to the factor responsible for dwarfness in the first generation. complete illustration ( 6. 2 ) of this experiment, analyse

it on the basis of indicators and write your inferences in the science diary. 101 indicators • characters of plants in the second generation. • plants in the second generation and their factors. • recessive trait in the first generation and the second generation. statistics in mendel ' s experiment among the 1064 plants obtained in the second generation, 787 plants were tall and 277 plants were dwarf. the ratio of the result obtained is approximately 3 : 1. he continued his experiments based on contrasting traits of the other six different characters in pea plant. complete table 6. 1 given below and compare the ratios. why does the recessive trait in the first generation appear in the second generation? mendel came up with the assumption that during gamete formation

the factors that determine a particular character segregate without getting mixed ; ie., half of the gametes formed from first generation plant tt, contain t and the other half contain t. the inferences formulated by mendel from such experiments are given below. • a character is controlled by the combination of two factors. • one trait is expressed ( dominant trait ) and the other trait remains hidden ( recessive trait ) in the offsprings of the first generation. • the traits that remain hidden in the first generation appear in the second generation. • the ratio of the dominant and the recessive traits in the second generation is 3 : 1. parental plants first generation second generation approximate ( self pollination ) ratio position of flowers axial × terminal 651 ( axial ), 207 ( terminal )

shape of seeds round × wrinkled 882 ( round ), 299 ( wrinkled ) table 6. 1 hybridization experiment and ratio nt - 885 - 3 - biology - 10 - ( e ) - vol - 2 102 tr tr tr tr tr tr tr tr gametes illustration 6. 3 hybridization of two characters x ttrr ttrr tr gametes first generation ( f1 ). parental plants ttrr tr self pollination in first generation - ttrr x ttrr tall plant, round seed dwarf plant, wrinkled seed ttrr tall plant, round seed in his first experiment, mendel observed the inheritance of a single pair of contrasting traits. he observed the inheritance of two pairs of contrasting traits of the same plant in the next stage. observe the illustration showing the hybridization experiment conducted by mendel on two characters namely, height of the plant and shape of the seed.

complete the illustration suitably. based on the indicators, analyse illustration 6. 3 and write down the inferences in the science diary. 103 indicators • factors present in the gametes produced by first generation. • characters in the plants of second generation. • characters different from parents that appeared in the second generation. through this experiment mendel could find the reason for the appearance of new combination of characters in offsprings that were not expressed in parents. mendel explained that the appearance of variations in offsprings ( characters not present in previous generation ) is due to the independent assortment of each character. gregor mendel described those which are responsible for the inheritance of characters as factors. the real

structure and peculiarities of these factors were not identified till the early 20th century. it was through further studies that the significance of dna ( deoxyribo nucleic acid ) molecule in the inheritance of characters was made clear. it was also found that the carriers of heredity which mendel described as ' factors ' were the genes present in dna. findings about the structure of dna in chromosomes became a great achievement in later genetic researches. molecular genetics is a fast developing area in the field of scientific research. dna ( deoxyribonucleic acid ) two scientists, james watson and francis crick, presented the double helical model of dna in 1953. this model fetched wide acceptance in the scientific world, and they were awarded the nobel prize in 1962. figure 6. 2

watson and crick mendel gains recognition mendel presented the most scientific inferences about the inheritance of characters. but, at that time the scientific world discarded his inferences. scientists named carl correns, erich von tschermak and hugo de vries conducted similar experiments and observations independently. before publishing the results of their studies, they noticed the experiments and inferences of gregor mendel. then, they published their study results to substantiate scientifically the inferences of gregor mendel. thus in 1990, the inferences of mendel were established as mendel ’ s laws of inheritance. 104 as per the double helical model, dna molecule contains two strands. a structure with two long strands made up of sugar and

phosphate, and rungs with nitrogen bases, was suggested. based on the indicators, analyse illustration 6. 4 and 6. 5 and the description given below. prepare a note on the structure of dna. dna molecule is made up of units called nucleotides. a nucleotide contains a sugar molecule, a phosphate molecule and a nitrogen base. rungs long strands cytosine adenine thymine guanine one strand of dna illustration 6. 4 structure of dna nitrogen base phosphate sugar molecule illustration 6. 5 nucleotide 105 illustration 6. 6 strands of dna dna contains deoxyribose sugar. nitrogen bases are molecules that contain nitrogen and are alkaline in nature. since dna has four kinds of nitrogen bases, namely adenine, thymine, guanine and cytosine, dna has four kinds of nucleotides too. nitrogen bases, the

building components of dna, are molecules with great specificity. in dna, the base adenine pairs only with thymine and guanine pairs only with cytosine. indicators • components of nucleotide. • nitrogen bases. • specificity maintained by nitrogen bases in pairing. the arrangement of nucleotides in a dna molecule is illustrated below. redraw this illustration ( 6. 6 ) in the science diary and complete its second strand. a humble attempt, yet a great achievement! rosalind franklin watson and crick happened to see the x - ray diffraction picture of dna, captured using x - rays by rosalind franklin, a researcher who was conducting research to identify the structure of dna. from this, they were able to disclose the molecular structure of dna, the molecule of life. based on this picture,

watson and crick produced models using various things in their hostel room and ensured the possibility of double helical model of dna. 106 gene cell chromosome dna illustration 6. 7 nucleus number of strands type of sugar nitrogen bases dna rna table 6. 2 rna ( ribonucleic acid ) rna is another nucleic acid like dna. rna is also formed of nucleotides. ribose sugar is present in rna. in rna, the nitrogen base uracil is seen instead of thymine. majority of rnas have only a single strand. compare the structure of dna and rna and complete table ( 6. 2 ) suitably. how do genes act? based on the indicators, analyse illustration 6. 8 and the description. write inferences in your science diary. how do genes act? the activity of particular proteins ( enzymes ) controls metabolic

activities and is responsible for specific characteristics. genes contain information for protein synthesis. genes are particular segments of dna. observe illustration 6. 7 and get an understanding about the location of genes. 107 dna mrna reaches outside the nucleus. mrna reaches ribosome mrna forms from dna trna brings different kinds of amino acids to ribosome. based on the information in mrna, protein is synthesized by adding amino acids. illustration 6. 8 action of genes dna does not participate directly in protein synthesis. dna performs its activities with the help of rna. rna that carries information from dna reaches ribosome and controls protein synthesis. since this rna is the messenger of dna, it is called messenger rna or

mrna. besides mrna, there are trna ( transfer rna ) that carry amino acids to the ribosomes and rrna ( ribosomal rna ) that are seen associated with ribosomes. protein molecule is synthesized by the combined activities of all these molecules. indicators • different kinds of rnas. • role of mrna in protein synthesis. • activities that take place in the nucleus. • activities that take place in the cytoplasm. prepare a flow chart including the processes involved in protein synthesis in the science diary. 108 figure 6. 3 somatic chromosomes sex chromosomes chromosomes in humans each species has a definite number of chromosomes. analyse figure 6. 3 on the basis of indicators and the description. prepare a note on chromosomes in humans in your science diary.

there are 46 chromosomes in human beings. of these, 44 are somatic chromosomes and two are sex chromosomes. a somatic chromosome pair contains two identical chromosomes. thus in human beings there are 22 pairs of somatic chromosomes. sex chromosomes are of two types. they are called x chromosome and y chromosome. females have two x chromosomes and males have one x chromosome and one y chromosome. ie., the genetic makeup of female is 44 + xx and that of male is 44 + xy. indicators • chromosome number • somatic chromosomes • sex chromosomes genetics of variation analyse the description given below and illustration ( 6. 9 ). based on the indicators, write your inferences about the processes that cause variations in organisms. 109 chromosomes and diseases certain diseases have

genetic causes. for example, it has been discovered that in humans, the disorder of gene in chromosome number 11 and the disorder of gene in chromosome number 14 is responsible for sickle cell anemia and alzheimer ’ s disease respectively. melanoma, the skin cancer, is caused by the disorder of gene in chromosome number 9. crossing over in chromosomes – a source of variation during the initial phase of meiosis, chromosomes pair and exchange their parts. this process is called crossing over of chromosomes. as a result of this, part of a dna crosses over to become the part of another dna. this causes a difference in the distribution of genes. when these chromosomes are transferred to the next generation, it causes the expression of new characters in offsprings. indicators

• crossing over of chromosomes. • role of crossing over in causing variations. combination of allele during fertilization the chromosomes of parents reach the offsprings through gametes. when gametes undergo fusion, the combination of allele changes. this causes the expression of characteristics in offsprings that are different from parents. thus, fertilization causes variations in the next generation. stage 1 stage 2 stage 3 illustration 6. 9 crossing over of chromosomes figure 6. 4 110 illustration 6. 10 determination of sex ( 44 + xx ) ( 44 + xy ) mutation a sudden heritable change in the genetic constitution of an organism is called mutation. this may occur due to defects in the duplication of dna, certain chemicals, radiations, etc. mutations

bring about changes in genes which can be transmitted over generations and thus leading to variations in characters. mutations have great relevance in evolution. is the child male or female? what is the genetic mechanism that determines whether a child is male or female? observe illustration 6. 10. discuss with the help of indicators and write down inferences in the science diary. indicators • number of chromosomes in male and female. • chromosome difference in male and female. 111 what is the possibility for the birth of a male or a female child? discuss. the xy chromosomes of the father determine whether the child is male or female. child with xx sex chromosomes is female and one with xy sex chromosomes is male. difference in skin colour

what may be the reason for the difference in the colour of skin in people living in various parts of the world? melanin, a pigment protein imparts colour to the skin. the rise or fall in the production of melanin is due to difference in the function of alleles of genes responsible for skin colour. this is the reason for the colour difference of human skin. it is not racial difference which makes the skin colour dark or light. this is simply an adaptation to live under the sun. races among mankind are only cultural. biologically, all men are of the same race. studies in genetics become meaningful only when one attains an awareness to consider all men equal without any racial discrimination. illustration 6. 11 different colour of human skin 112 1. the nitrogen base absent in rna.

a. adenine b. thymine c. uracil d. cytosine 2. arrange the stages of protein synthesis in the form of a flow chart. • protein synthesized by adding amino acids. • mrna reaches ribosomes. • mrna is formed. • amino acids are carried to the ribosomes. 3. observe the hybridization experiment given below. a. illustrate this hybridization experiment using symbols. b. illustrate the second generation formed by the self pollination of first generation plant. 4. three processes that cause variations in new generations are given. prepare a short note on each of the processes. • crossing over of chromosome • fertilization • mutation • prepare an edition including information on scientists who have made contributions in the progress of genetics. • prepare models of dna and rna using locally available

materials and present them in science exhibition. plant with green coloured seed plant with yellow coloured seedx plant with green coloured seed did you notice saju ’ s doubt when he heard the doctor ’ s talk in the seminar conducted by the health club? how can bacteria produce insulin that can be used by humans? note down your assumption. how can the insulin produced by bacterium be used by humans? the insulin used for the treatment of diabetes is produced mainly from bacteria. 114 human cell cutting of insulin gene illustration 7. 1 production of insulin through genetic engineering joining insulin gene with plasmid active insulin is produced from this bacteria that multiply in the culture medium produce inactive insulin circular dna of the bacterium ( plasmid ) plasmid with ligated

insulin gene is inserted in to bacterial cell human dna dna of the bacterium isolation of plasmid bacteria observe illustration 7. 1 on the various stages in the production of bacteria that are capable of producing insulin. based on the indicators, analyse the illustration, validate your assumption and write down the inferences in the science diary. 115 indicators • change brought about in the genetic constitution of bacteria. • new trait formed in this bacterium. • ability of production of insulin by succeeding generations of this bacterium. genetic engineering science has progressed in such a way that it can produce organisms with desirable qualities, by bringing about changes in the genetic material. the use of microorganisms and biological processes for

various human requisites is called biotechnology. from bc 4000 onwards organisms like yeast, a kind of fungus, were used to prepare food items like bread. the ability of fungi and bacteria to convert sugar into alcohol was utilised to make wine, appam and cake. these can be considered as traditional methods of biotechnology. genetic engineering is the modern form of biotechnology. today, we can produce things essential for humans by bringing about changes in the genetic material of organisms. you have already been familiarised with this idea when you analysed the method of production of insulin. genetic engineering is the technology of controlling traits of organisms by bringing about desirable changes in the genetic constitution of organisms. the basis

of this is the discovery of the fact that genes can be cut and joined. how are the very minute genes cut and joined? analyse the description given below on the basis of the indicators and prepare notes. enzymes are used to cut and join genes. the enzyme restriction endonuclease is used to cut genes. this enzyme is known as ‘ genetic scissors ’. the enzyme ligase is used for joining. this enzyme is called ‘ genetic glue ’. 116 t ^ md≥kniv ] cntim [ \ illustration 7. 2 scope of genetic engineering genetically modified animals and crops gene therapy forensic test how was the insulin producing gene of humans transferred into bacteria? a gene from one cell is transferred to another cell by using suitable vectors. vectors which contain ligated genes enter

target cells. plasmids in bacteria are generally used as vectors. in this way, the new genes become a part of the genetic constitution of target cells. indicators • cutting of gene • ligation ( insertion ) of gene • vectors the progress in genetic engineering has influenced various sectors of life. identify this by observing illustration 7. 2 indicating some of the scope of genetic engineering. gene therapy genetic engineering has made a great leap in the treatment of genetic diseases. gene therapy is a method of treatment in which the genes that are responsible for diseases are removed and normal functional genes are inserted in their place. this has triggered great hope in the control of genetic diseases. 117 how can the genes that are responsible for diseases be

identified from among thousands of microscopic genes? what is your response to thara ’ s doubt? analyse the description given below on the basis of indicators. write down your inferences in the science diary. human genome project eventhough science has progressed a lot, we couldn ’ t control genetic diseases. the reason for this is that we could not identify the exact gene responsible for a specific trait and its location. in 1990, the human genome project was started as an attempt to solve this issue. as a result of experiments conducted in various laboratories around the world till 2003, the secrets of human genome were revealed. the technology known as gene mapping helped to identify the location of a gene in the dna responsible for a particular trait. the complete genetic material present

in an organism is called its genome. in human dna, majority of genes, except the genes that code for protein are non - functional. they are called junk genes. indicators • relevance of human genome project • benefit of gene mapping figure 7. 1 the logo of human genome project 118 human genome has about 24000 functional genes. major share of human dna includes junk genes. there is only 0. 2 percent difference in dna among humans. about 200 genes in human genome are identical to those in bacteria. protein required for treatment table 7. 1 disease / symptom interferons v iral diseases insulin diabetes endorphin pain somatotropin growth disorders did you understand the relevance of the human genome project? prepare a wall magazine using the information given below and

collecting more data. exhibit the magazine in the classroom. genetically modified animals and crops many proteins that can be used for the treatment of diseases in humans are produced through genetic engineering. examine table 7. 1 given below and prepare notes on these proteins. genetic engineering has progressed a lot more from biotechnology. today, genetic modification in organisms can be implemented more effectively. this is made possible through the insertion of gene that code for desirable characters into the genetic constitution of an organism. 119 editing of genetic constitution today, genetic engineering can edit the genes in the genetic constitution of organisms just as editing an essay. this most modern aspect of genetic engineering is called gene editing.

crispr - cas 9 is the most effective genetic scissors used for this. this contains ' cas 9 ', an enzyme and a guide rna ( grna ). active researches on gene editing are being conducted worldwide. recently, china released the news on the birth of twins whose genes were edited. it is declared that these children have acquired resistance to hiv through gene editing. this technology has created an avenue to the endless scope of gene therapy. but it has also initiated many criticisms. worldwide protests are going on against researches which do not consider the possibilities of exploitations, dangerous effects and deterioration of values due to these experiments. one of the future promises of genetic engineering is pharm animals. genes responsible for the production of insulin and

growth hormones required for humans are inserted into animals like cow, pig etc, transforming them into pharm animals. there are certain limitations in producing insulin using bacteria. the most important hurdle in this field is the culturing of bacteria. researches in this field show that instead of this, medicines can be extracted from the blood or milk of genetically modified animals. genetic modification is implemented not only in animals but in plants also. today, insect resistant plants like bt brinjal, soyabean, cotton, maize etc are common. when genetic modification is carried out in organisms, it should be ensured that there are no harmful consequences to humans or nature. prepare a science edition on the new inventions in this field by collecting more information. 120

alec jeffreys did you notice the headline of the newspaper report? how are persons identified through dna testing? read the description given below. discuss it on the basis of the indicators and formulate inferences. write them down in the science diary. dna finger printing the technology of testing the arrangement of nucleotides is dna profiling. certain experiments conducted by a scientist named alec jeffreys in 1984 paved the way for dna testing. just like the difference in the fingerprint of each person, the arrangement of nucleotides in each person also differs. this discovery became the basis of dna testing. hence this technology is also called dna finger printing. lost child found after years : identified through dna testing dna samples collected from the scene of crime suspect - 1

suspect - 2 suspect - 3 the arrangement of nucleotides among close relatives has many similarities. hence, dna finger printing is helpful to find out hereditary characteristics, to identify real parents in cases of parental dispute and to identify persons found after long periods of missing due to natural calamities or wars. dna of the skin, hair, nail, blood and other body fluids obtained from the place of murder, robbery etc., is compared with the dna of suspected persons. thus, the real culprit can be identified from among the suspected persons through this method. 121 bioweapons - a new challengebioweapons - a new challengebioweapons - a new challengebioweapons - a new challengebioweapons - a new challenge application of genetically modified pathogens and

pathogens multiplied through biotechnology upon enemies is called biowar. this becomes a threat to the existence of human beings. genetic modificationgenetic modificationgenetic modificationgenetic modificationgenetic modification - violation of rights - violation of rights - violation of rights - violation of rights - violation of rights certain organizations argue that genetic modification is an intrusion upon the freedom of living beings and it is a violation of rights. ttttthrhrhrhrhreaeaeaeaeat to indigt to indigt to indigt to indigt to indig enous venous venous venous venous v arietiesarietiesarietiesarietiesarieties it is criticized that genetically modified varieties cause harm to indigenous varieties and may cause health issues to humans. indicators

• basis of the technology of dna finger printing. • scope of dna finger printing. we have familiarized ourselves with the endless scope of genetic engineering. collect more information regarding the scope of genetic engineering and exhibit in the science corner. through active researches and new discoveries, this branch is advancing day by day. but, like any other technology, genetic engineering has also been misused. observe the collage given below. is it right to misuse technologies that can pave the way to human progress? as such possibilities prevail, must we promote genetic engineering? organize a debate in the class on this topic. science and technology are the products of man ' s reasoning ability. we can justify this only if they are utilized for human benefit.

we must use science and technology as means to overcome the challenges faced by human beings. 122 1. which of the following is not a part of modern genetic engineering? a ) dna profiling b ) gene mapping c ) dna finger printing d ) x - ray diffraction 2. gene therapy is an example of the boons of science for human existence. a ) what is gene therapy? b ) what was the discovery that led to gene therapy? c ) how does gene therapy become useful to human beings? 3. ‘ since genetic engineering has many harmful effects, it shouldn ’ t be promoted ’. do you agree with this statement? why? • prepare a slide presentation on the stages of insulin production through genetic engineering. • prepare a science edition by collecting pictures and news related to genetic engineering.

did you notice the child ’ s doubt? how did the planets, including earth originate? how might have life originated? is there life on other planets? all such questions have always come under the purview of scientific enquiry. science has been able to put forth certain hypotheses on how earth and life on earth originated. the more predominant theory, on the origin of life on earth that was formed about 4500 million years ago, is the chemical evolution theory. the panspermia hypothesis is also a widely discussed one. if earth and mars originated in the same way, wouldn ' t there be organisms on mars like earth? 124 atmosphere of primitive earth • gases like hydrogen, nitrogen carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia, water vapour, hydrogen sulphide etc. • no free oxygen. source of energy

• thunder and lightning. • ultraviolet radiations. • volcanic eruptions. simple organic molecules • amino acids • monosaccharide • nitrogen bases • fatty acids etc complex organic molecules • protein • polysaccharide • nucleotides • lipids etc. primitive cell nucleic acids, lipid layer illustration 81. chemical evolution condensation of water vapour present in the atmosphere and the resulting incessant rain led to the formation of oceans. the panspermia argues that life originated in some other planet in the universe and accidentally reached the earth. the organic substances obtained from the meteors that fell on earth support this. the hypothesis that evolved into the theory of chemical evolution is that life originated as a result of the changes that occurred in

the chemical substances in seawater, under specific conditions in primitive earth. this theory is generally accepted by the scientific world due to its experimental evidences. the russian scientist a. i. oparin ( 1924 ) and the british scientist j. b. s. haldane ( 1929 ) are the proponents of this theory. analyse illustration 8. 1 and prepare a note on the theory of chemical evolution in your science diary. a. i. oparin j. b. s. haldane indicators • atmosphere of primitive earth – peculiarities. • sources of energy. • formation of ocean. • chemical reactions that led to the formation of cell. 125 electric energy condenser water amino acids get sedimentedheat energy illustration 8. 2 urey – miller experiment methane, ammonia, water vapour glass flask

the scientific basis of this hypothesis regarding the origin of life was later proved through various experiments. urey – miller experiment urey and miller conducted their experiment by artificially recreating the atmosphere of primitive earth that contained methane, ammonia, hydrogen and water vapour. analyse illustration 8. 2 and the description, on the basis of the given indicators and prepare a note in your science diary. in the place of natural energy sources like thunder and lightning in the atmosphere of primitive earth, high voltage electricity was passed through the gaseous mixture in the glass flask. then, this gaseous mixture was cooled with the help of a condenser. the sediment substances were separated and when observed, organic molecules such

as amino acids, were found. later many scientists designed similar experiments and more organic compounds were synthesized. this finally gave more acceptance to the oparin – haldane hypothesis. stanley miller harold urey indicators • atmosphere of primitive earth and chemical components in the glass flask. • organic molecules formed after the chemical reaction. in the oceans of primitive earth, organic compounds were formed due to chemical evolution that continued for millions of years. on the basis of the given indicators analyse the major events related to the origin of life as illustrated in the geological time scale 8. 3. prepare a note in the science diary. 126 illustration 8. 3 geological time scale millions of years ago prokaryotes primitive cell eukaryotes colony of eukaryotes

multicellular organisms 2 1 3 4 5 3800 origin of life on earth 3500 origin of prokaryotes 1500 origin of eukaryotes 1000 origin of multicellular organisms indicators • primitive cell • origin of prokaryotes • origin of eukaryotes • appearance of multicellular organisms researches all over the world are still striving to unravel the mysteries related to the origin of life on earth. presence of life on other planets is also a main area of research. life emerged as a result of the accidental combining of inorganic molecules. 127 many space explorations still undertake the quest to find out whether similar phenomena occur anywhere else among the millions of celestial orbs. the method of science is formulation of inferences on the basis of evidences obtained through experiments and

observations. science emerged along with the origin of human beings. so direct evidences are not available for explaining the origin of life and the process of evolution that began a long time before the origin of man. hence, scientific concepts in these two areas undergo continuous changes. this is not a limitation of science. science is unprejudiced and accepts all new knowledge formulated on the basis of derived evidences and rejects or revises the existing ones. this aspect of science makes it credible. evolution - through theories many scientists have attempted to explain the history of evolution from primitive cells to the biodiversity that exists today. the first attempt among them was by jean baptist lamarck, a french biologist. lamarckism

the characters developed during the life time of organisms are called acquired characters. lamarck explained that these characters accumulate through generations and lead to the formation of new species. according to lamarck giraffes had short necks in the beginning. when they faced food scarcity, they stretched their necks to reach out to tall trees. thus giraffes with long necks emerged through generations ( figure 8. 1 ). but this argument was not accepted by the scientific world as these acquired characters are not inheritable. lamarck 128 charles darwin figure 8. 1 darwinism a logical scientific theory on evolution was first put forward by charles robert darwin, an english naturalist. darwin adopted a scientific method for formulating inferences through observation

and data analysis. this scientific credibility paved way for the larger acceptance of darwin ’ s theory of evolution. darwin ’ s voyage darwin ’ s voyage to the galapagos islands in the ship hms beagle was a turning point both in his life and in the history of the theory of evolution. charles darwin formulated his theory of evolution on the basis of the studies conducted on organisms in galapagos islands. darwin was only 22 years old when he joined a group appointed by the british government to construct maps of coastal areas. by the time he returned to britain after 7 years, he had collected necessary evidences for his theory of evolution. after further follow up enquiries, observations and studies, he presented his theory in the renowned text origin of species by means of natural

selection, at the age of fifty. this theory that broke off many existing beliefs got great acceptance in the scientific world. finches were one among the organisms observed and closely studied by darwin in the galapagos islands. the differences in the beaks of these finches attracted darwin. on the basis of indicators, analyse illustration 8. 4 and the description given below. write down your inferences in the science diary. 129 illustration 8. 4 galapagos finches tree finch medium sized tree finch woodpecker finch insectivorous finch cactus eating finch small ground finch large ground finch ancestor finch insectivorous finches have small beaks and those that feed on cactus plants have long and sharp beaks. there were also woodpecker finches that used sharp beaks to pick small twigs for

feeding on worms from the holes in tree trunks. the ground finches that feed on seeds with large beaks were also present. indicators • which peculiarity of the finches attracted darwin? • how do these peculiarities help finches in their survival? it is clear that the finches darwin observed had beaks adapted to their feeding habits. another idea that influenced darwin ’ s speculations about the diversity of the beaks of finches was that of thomas robert malthus, an economist. rate of food production is not proportionate to the growth of human population. thomas robert malthus pointed out that scarcity of food led to diseases, starvation and struggle for existence. analyse illustration 8. 5 and the description given below. identify

the main concepts of the ‘ theory of natural selection ’ put forward by darwin by incorporating malthusian ideas. based on the indicators, prepare a note in your science diary. robert malthus 130 the theory of natural selection every species produces more number of offsprings than that can survive on earth. they compete with one another for food, space and mates. the competition becomes hard when the number of organisms is more and the availability of resources is less. many variations are visible in organisms. these variations may be favourable or unfavourable. those with favourable variations survive in the struggle for existence. others are eliminated. variations that are inherited through generations and repeated differently

help to form species that are different from their ancestors. this type of selection, done by nature, leads to the diversity of species that we see around us. this is the explanation of darwin ’ s theory which is known as the theory of natural selection. indicators • circumstance that leads to severe competition among organisms. • variations and natural selection. • origin of new species. illustration 8. 5 theory of natural selection organisms with variations over production struggle for existence those with no favourable variations those with favourable variations destroyed natural selection survive favourable variations are transferred to the next generation. accumulation of variations inherited through generations. origin of new species 131

though darwin identified that continuous variations occurred in organisms, he could not explain the reasons for these variations. during his period there was no idea regarding genes, chromosomes etc. darwinism was revised in the light of new information from the fields of genetics, cytology, geology and paleontology. this modified version of darwinism is known as neo darwinism. evidences of evolution there are many evidences to support the evolution of new species. paleontology, comparative morphology, physiology and modern molecular biology provide evidences to validate evolution. fossils – evidence of evolution fossils are the remnants of primitive organisms. they are evidences that explain the history of life on earth. fossils may be the body, body parts or imprints of organisms. the

age of fossils can be calculated scientifically. they are categorised on the basis of geological time scale and their peculiarities are studied. the oldest known fossils dating from about 3. 5 billion years ago are of prokaryotes. fossils from different layers of rocks indicate the evolution of eukaryotes from prokaryotes. cell biology and molecular biology make fossil evidences more scientific. what are the inferences you can arrive at from such studies? hugo devries mutation theory you know that changes in genes are one of the reasons for variations in organisms. sudden changes that occur in genes are called mutations. mutation theory explains that new species are formed by the inheritance of such changes. this theory was formulated by a dutch scientist, hugo devries. later it was

explained that mutations that cause variations lead to the evolution of species. 132 illustration 8. 7 comparative morphological studies analyse illustration 8. 6 and prepare notes. comparative morphological studies observe illustration 8. 7 and compare the structure of forelimbs in lizard, bat, whale etc. recently formed fossils have complex structure. primitive fossils have simple structure. certain fossils are connecting links between different species. illustration 8. 6 evidences provided by fossils the forelimbs of these organisms differ in their external appearance. are they different in their anatomy too? these forelimbs are made up of blood vessels, nerves, muscles and bones. differences in their external appearances are their

adaptations to live in their own habitats. organs that are similar in structure and perform different functions are called homologous organs. 133 enzymes control chemical reactions. energy is stored in atp molecules. genes determine hereditary traits. carbohydrates, proteins and fats are the basic substances. bacteria human being illustration 8. 8 biochemistry and physiology do such anatomical resemblances justify the inference that all organisms evolved from a common ancestor? discuss and write down your inferences in the science diary. biochemistry and physiology how different are microbes, plants and animals in their external appearance! but there are close resemblances in their cell structure and physiology. observe illustration 8. 8.

what proof of evolution do you get from these facts? isn ’ t it clear from these facts that different species that exist today have a common ancestor? discuss. molecular biology through a comparative study of protein molecules in different species, the evolutionary relationship among organisms can be identified. mutations may occur in the genes that determine the amino acid sequence in protein molecules. this causes changes in amino acids. the amino acids in the chain of haemoglobin in man has been compared to the amino acids in the chain of other organisms. available data are listed below. based on the indicators, analyse table 8. 1 and write your inferences in the science diary. 134 this is an effective method to illustrate the branching pattern of evolution from a common ancestor.

these kinds of molecular studies help to find out the evolutionary relationship of different species of organisms. indicators • which organism is the farthest from humans from the evolutionary point of view? why? • which organism is the closest to man from the evolutionary point of view? what is the reason for this? evolution of human beings an evolutionary tree relating to certain organisms including humans is given below. organisms show many similarities as they have evolved from a common ancestor. analyse illustrations 8. 9 and description on the main branches in the evolution of human beings. prepare a note in your science diary. humans, chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, gibbon and monkeys are included in the category anthropoidea. this

is further classified into cercopithecoidea and hominoidea. difference from the amino acids in the chain of haemoglobin in man no change difference of one amino acid difference of 31 amino acids. table 8. 1 organism chimpanzee gorilla rat 135 manchimpanzeegorillaorangutangibbonmonkey illustration 8. 9 evolution of human beings cercopithecoidea small brain, long tailed. anthropoidea hominoidea developed brain, freely movable hands indicators • which organism is the closest to humans in specific characters? • how anthropoidea, cercopithecoidea and hominoidea are related to each other? • what are the characteristics of the organisms which belong to the group hominoidea? • “ man evolved from monkeys ”. how would you respond to this statement?

illustration 8. 10 depicts the evolutionary history of modern man. formulate inference on how biological changes helped human being to emerge in the present form, by analysing the illustration. 136 illustration 8. 10 main stages in the history of human evolution ardipithecus ramidus • the most primitive member of the human race. • fossils were discovered from africa. australopithecus afarensis • slender body. • fossils were discovered from africa. homo habilis • made weapons from stones and bone pieces. • fossils were discovered from africa. homo erectus • thick chin and large teeth, had the ability to stand erect. • fossils were discovered from africa and asia. homo neanderthalensis • contemporary to modern man. • fossils were discovered from europe and asia homo sapiens • modern man.

• first fossils were discovered from france. 137 what are the features of modern man that differentiate him from other organisms included in the historical path of human evolution? • • • does the interference of human beings have a negative impact on the existence of organisms and nature itself? biodiversity at global level has increased much recently than ever before. but this biodiversity is on a dangerous decline due to the interference of human beings. it is recorded in the evolutionary history that there occurred five mass extinctions till now and biodiversity got reestablished rapidly afterwards. would the reckless interference of intelligent human beings destroy the continuity of life on earth? discuss. today we are aware of the challenges raised by climatic

changes brought about by human interventions and the extinction of organisms. individuals and organizations are actively participating in programmes for the conservation of nature. this reinforces the fact that human life is possible on earth only with the preservation of other diverse ecosystems. human beings are capable of foreseeing far - reaching consequences and taking necessary precautions in this regard. this leaves us with hopes for future life on earth. 138 1. which concept is put forward by the theory of natural selection? a. origin of life b. origin of species c. origin of eukaryotes d. chemical evolution of life 2. list the main concepts that indicate how the biodiversity seen today has developed from prokaryotes. 3. how does the interference of human beings with nature

influence the process of evolution? how does this affect the existence of other organisms? 4. what are the evidences that substantiate the theories of evolution? identify and explain them. • prepare and exhibit a model of the experimental set up constructed by urey – miller to scientifically prove the theory of chemical evolution. • prepare a chart illustrating the evolutionary tree of man. • collect data on scientists who contributed scientific evidences for chemical evolution and prepare an edition. 139 notes 140 notes 141 notes 142 notes 143 notes constitution of india part iv a fundamental duties of citizens article 51 a fundamental duties - it shall be the duty of every citizen of india : ( a ) to abide by the constitution and respect its ideals and institutions,

the national flag and the national anthem ; ( b ) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom ; ( c ) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of india ; ( d ) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so ; ( e ) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of india transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities ; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women ; ( f ) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture ; ( g ) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers, wild life and to have compassion for living creatures ;

( h ) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform ; ( i ) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence ; ( j ) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievements ; ( k ) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between age of six and fourteen years. forests have a great role in conserving the health of the environment in which we live. forests are decisive in many respects. source of the water we drink and the air we breathe, balancing atmospheric temperature, determining weather, managing agriculture, source of our food etc., are some of those areas.

wild animals inhabit forests. each animal has a function to perform in the environment in which it lives. thus wild animals have a vital role in aspects like pollination of plants, dispersal of seeds, sustenance of forests etc. it is our duty to protect and preserve forests, lakes, rivers, wild animals etc, which are all part of our nature. also, article 51 ( g ) of our constitution reminds every citizen of india to have a compassion for living creatures. activities taken up for the conservation of forests and wild life by the forest department : • establishing forestry clubs in schools, for spreading knowledge about forests. • establishing eco - tourism centres as a part of encouraging eco - friendly tourism. • conducting nature study camps as a part of forest and wild life education.

• making public places green. • providing financial aid to conserve ' kaavu '. • turtle conservation project. • instituting ' vanamitra award ' for promoting creative contributions in the field of green projects. • instituting ' prakritimitra award ' for conserving habitats outside forests and biodiversity. • conducting the ' citizen conservator programme ' for ensuring the role of public in forest conservation. toll free number of forest department : 18004254733 its high time we protected nature and natural resources ….!

observe the picture. children and other organisms have a variety of experiences. what are they? • a child tasting a mango. • a snail withdrawing its body into the shell when it is touched. • 8 biology - x brain spinal cord nerves figure 1. 1 nervous system what are the factors to which children and other organisms respond here? • taste • touch • • the senses that evoke responses in organisms are called stimuli. do we recognise stimuli only from our immediate surroundings? hunger and thirst are stimuli formed inside the body, aren ' t they? find out more examples for such stimuli. how does the body receive stimuli? observe illustration 1. 1 and form inferences. there are specialized cells in the sense organs and other parts of the body to receive stimuli. these cells are known as receptors. they receive stimuli and generate suitable impulses. normally, responses occur when the impulses generated by the receptors on receiving the stimuli reach the brain. the nervous system controls and co - ordinates these actions. analyse figure 1. 1 and find out the major parts of the nervous system. illustration 1. 1 specialized cells that receive stimuli 9 biology - x schwann cell oligodendrocyte myelin sheath axon illustration 1. 3 formation of myelin sheath cell body

illustration 1. 2 neuron - structure and function cytoplasm nucleus neuron neuron or nerve cell is the basic structural unit of the nervous system. like all other cells, the neuron has a cell membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus. analyse illustration 1. 2 and tabulate the main parts of a neuron, its characteristics and function. write them down in the science diary. axons of most of the neurons are repeatedly encircled by myelin, a membrane containing lipid. this is called myelin sheath. analyse illustration 1. 3 and the description. find out the characteristics and significance of myelin sheath and prepare a note on the basis of the indicators given. dendrite • branches of dendron. • part that receives impulses from adjacent neuron. dendron • short filament from the cell body. • carries impulses from dendrites to the cell body. schwann cell • encircles the axon. axon • longest filament from the cell body. • carries impulses from the cell body to outside. axonite • branches of axon. • carries impulses to the synaptic knob. synaptic knob • tip of axonite. • secretes neurotransmitter. 10 biology - x figure 1. 2 a figure 1. 2 c figure 1. 2 b stimulus nerve is a group of axons. myelin sheath in the nerves is formed of schwann cells. myelin sheath in the brain and the spinal

cord is formed of specialized cells called oligodendrocytes. the myelin sheath has a shiny white colour. the part of the brain and the spinal cord where myelinated nerve cells are present in abundance is called white matter and the part where non - myelinated nerves cells are present is called grey matter. the major functions of the myelin sheath are to provide nutrients and oxygen to the axon, accelerate impulses, act as an electric insulator and protect the axon from external shocks. indicators • formation of myelin sheath. • grey matter, white matter. • functions of myelin sheath. oligodendrocytes and schwann cells oligodendrocytes and schwann cells provide protection to neurons. an oligodendrocyte constructs myelin sheath by covering the different axons simultaneously or by covering the different parts of the same axon repeatedly. myelin sheath made up of schwann cells are seen in the axons in nerves. a schwann cell encircles the axon repeatedly. generation and transmission of impulses the nervous system manages control and co - ordination through impulses. how are these impulses generated and transmitted through neurons? analyse the given figures ( 1. 2 a, b, c ) on the basis of the description and the indicators, and arrive at your own inferences.

the outer surface of the plasma membrane of the neuron is positively charged and the inner surface is negatively charged. this is due to the difference in the distribution of certain ions ( figure 1. 2 a ). 11 biology - x synaptic knob synaptic cleft dendrite neurotransmitter electric impulse electric impulse illustration 1. 4 synapse when stimulated, the distribution of ions in that particular part changes and hence the inner surface becomes positively charged and the outer surface becomes negatively charged ( figure 1. 2 b ). this momentary charge difference stimulates its adjacent parts and similar changes occur there too. as this process proceeds, ( figure 1. 2 c ) impulses get transmitted as electric charges. nerve impulses are messages transmitted through the neurons. indicators • charges on either side of the plasma membrane. • change in the charges of ions when stimulated. • transmission of nerve impulse. synapse impulses generated in the receptor cells reach the brain. the brain analyses it and gives direction for proper response. to make this possible, the impulses formed in a neuron are to be transmitted to other neurons and associated cells. how does this become possible? analyse illustration 1. 4 and 1. 5 given below, and the

description. prepare a note, based on the indicators and your analysis. synapse is the junction between two neurons or a neuron and a muscle cell or a neuron and a glandular cell. when electric impulses from the axon reach the synaptic knob, certain chemical substances are secreted from there to the synaptic cleft. these chemical substances are called neurotransmitters. they stimulate the adjacent dendrite or cell and new electric impulses are generated. acetylcholine and dopamine are examples of neurotransmitters. synapse helps to regulate the speed and direction of impulses. synapse 12 biology - x axon nerve connective tissue figure 1. 3 cross section of a nerve indicators • structure of synapse. • transmission of impulses through synapse. • significance of neurotransmitter. • different types of synapses. glandular cell illustration 1. 5 different types of synapses nerve cell muscle cell on the basis of the direction of impulse, neurons can be classified into sensory neurons and motor neurons. sensory neurons carry impulses to the brain and spinal cord. motor neurons carry impulses from the brain and spinal cord to various parts of the body. different types of neuron nerves you know that nerves are group of axons or nerve fibres. they are covered by connective

tissue ( figure 1. 3 ). nerves are classified into three on the basis of their functions. analyse table 1. 1 and prepare notes in your science diary. nerves and their peculiarities functions sensory nerve ( formed of sensory nerve fibres ) motor nerve ( formed of motor nerve fibres ) mixed nerve ( formed of sensory nerve fibres and motor nerve fibres ) carries impulses from various parts of the body to the brain and the spinal cord. carries impulses from brain and spinal cord to various parts of the body. carries impulses to and from the brain and spinal cord. table 1. 1 nerves and their functions 13 biology - x illustration 1. 6 central nervous system peripheral nervous system spinal cord cranial nerves ( 12 pair ) spinal nerves ( 31 pair ) brain figure 1. 4 meninges skull layers of meninges nervous system central nervous system brain spinal nerves nervous system the nervous system consists of two parts, namely the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. analyse illustration 1. 6 and complete the flow chart. brain brain is the central part of the nervous system. based on the indicators, analyse figure 1. 4 and the description, understand how the brain gets nutrition and protection. make notes in your science diary.

the brain is protected inside the skull. it is covered by the meninges, a three - layered membrane. the cerebrospinal fluid is filled within the inner membranes of meninges and the ventricles of the brain. 14 biology - x cerebellum • the second largest part of the brain. • seen behind the cerebrum as two flaps. • fissures and grooves are present. • coordinates muscular activities and maintains equilibrium of the body. cerebrum • the largest part of the brain. • numerous fissures and folds are seen. • the grey coloured outer part of cerebrum is called cortex and the white coloured inner part is called medulla. • centre of thought, intelligence, memory and imagination. • evokes sensations. • controls voluntary movements. hypothalamus • situated just below the thalamus. • plays a major role in the maintenance of homeostasis. thalamus • situated below the cerebrum. • acts as relay station of impulses to and from the cerebrum. • analyses impulses from various parts of the body and sends the important ones to the cerebrum. illustration 1. 7 structure and function of the brain medulla oblongata • the rod shaped medulla oblongata is seen below the cerebrum, located near the cerebellum. • controls involuntary actions like heart beat, breathing etc.

the cerebrospinal fluid formed from the blood is reabsorbed into the blood. the functions of the cerebrospinal fluid are to provide nutrients and oxygen to the tissues of the brain, regulate the pressure inside the brain and to protect the brain from injuries. indicators • protection of the brain. • nourishment of the brain. the different parts of the brain control and coordinate all life activities. analyse illustration 1. 7 showing the structure of the brain and list the characteristics and functions of each part. 15 biology - x dorsal root ventral root illustration 1. 8 cross section of the spinal cord central canal grey matter white matter aren ' t you convinced of the importance of the brain? discuss the necessity of wearing helmets while riding two wheelers. the spinal cord within the vertebral column the spinal cord of a new born baby extends upto the tip of the vertebral column. but in adults, it is seen only upto the middle of the vertebral column. this is because the spinal cord does not grow in proportion to the growth of the vertebral column. there are 31 pairs of spinal nerves arising from the spinal cord. a dorsal root and a ventral root join to form a spinal nerve. sensory impulses reach the spinal cord

through the dorsal root. motor impulses go out of the spinal cord through the ventral root. impulses from different parts of the body are transmitted to and from the brain through the spinal cord. it also coordinates the repeated movements during walking, running etc. indicators • protection of the spinal cord. • formation of the spinal nerves. • functions of the spinal cord. spinal cord the spinal cord is the continuation of the medulla oblongata. on the basis of the indicators, analyse illustration 1. 8 and the description and prepare notes in your science diary. the spinal cord is protected inside the vertebral column. like the brain, the spinal cord is also covered by meninges. the central canal seen in the centre of the spinal cord is also filled with cerebrospinal fluid. in the spinal cord, white matter is seen outside and grey matter is seen inside. 16 biology - x illustration 1. 9 the pathway of impulses in a reflex action interneuron the neuron that connects the sensory neuron and the motor neuron. generates quick responses according to the sensory impulses. motor neuron carries the information from spinal cord to related muscles. sensory neuron carries impulses to the spinal cordreceptor generates impulses. related muscle withdraws the hand by the action of the

muscles. stimulus observe figure 1. 5. what is the peculiarity of such responses? analyse the description given below and note down the peculiarities. the accidental and involuntary responses towards stimuli are called reflex actions. they do not happen consciously. how does reflex action happen in our body? analyse illustration 1. 9 and the description and complete the flow chart. figure 1. 5 different responses 17 biology - x stimulus alcohol and reflex alcohol accelerates the action of gama amino butyric acid ( gaba ), a neurotransmitter in the brain. higher doses of this neurotransmitter retard the brain action which in turn weakens the reflex action and prevents making proper decision at proper time. is it advisable to lift up people quickly by holding their arms or legs in an accident. what aspects related to spinal cord are to be taken care of while attending injured persons? discuss. reflex arc is the pathway of impulses in the reflex action. mainly spinal cord acts as the centre of reflex action and such reflexes are called spinal reflexes. but all reflexes are not under the control of the spinal cord. don ’ t we blink our eyes when light suddenly falls on our eyes or when objects move towards them? this is also a reflex action. such reflexes under the control of

the cerebrum are called cerebral reflexes. autonomous nervous system there may be instances in your life when you felt sudden fear or sadness. write down some of those experiences. • seeing a snake suddenly • • what are the changes that take place in the body during such emergency situations? list them. • heart beat increases • • • 18 biology - x illustration 1. 10 autonomous nervous system the pupil in the eye dilates. production of saliva decreases. trachea expands heart beat increases. gastric activities slow down. glycogen is converted to glucose. peristalsis in the intestine slows down. production of hormone increases. the pupil in the eye contracts. production of saliva increases. trachea contracts. heart beat becomes normal. gastric activities become normal. glucose is converted to glycogen. peristalsis in the intestine becomes normal. urinary bladder contracts. production of hormone decreases. urinary bladder regains normal state. sympathetic system parasympathetic system shouldn ' t these changes return to normal state? discuss. activities that take place beyond the conscious level are controlled by the autonomous nervous system, a part of the peripheral nervous system. the sympathetic system and the parasympathetic system together form the autonomous nervous

system. analyse illustration 1. 10 to understand the actions of sympathetic and parasympathetic systems during emergency situations and complete table 1. 2. 19 biology - x organ / part action of action of sympathetic system parasympathetic system pupil salivary gland t rachea heart stomach liver intestine urinary bladder table 1. 2 action of sympathetic and parasympathetic systems symptomsdisease causes loss of memory, inability to recognize friends and relatives, inability to do routine works. loss of body balance, irregular movement of muscles, shivering of the body, profuse salivation. epilepsy due to continuous muscular contraction, frothy discharge from the mouth, clenching of the teeth following which the patient falls unconscious. alzheimer ' s parkinsons epilepsy accumulation of an insoluble protein in the neural tissues of the brain. neurons get destroyed. destruction of specialised ganglions in the brain. production of dopamine, a neurotransmitter in the brain gets reduced. continuous and irregular flow of electric charges in the brain. table 1. 3 certain diseases affecting the nervous system nervous system and its disorders a healthy nervous system is the basis of normal body activities. even minor defects

in the nervous system may cause serious health problems. list out the familiar diseases that affect the nervous system. $ rabies $ $ conduct a seminar on ' the diseases affecting the nervous system ' by analysing table 1. 3 and collecting more information on it. 20 biology - x what should be our approach towards people affected by such diseases? discuss. the nervous system helps us to experience various stimuli as well as to respond towards them. special care should be taken to maintain the health of this organ system. receptors that receive stimuli promote the actions of nervous system. it would be very interesting to know about these receptors and the sense organs in which they are included. 1. the part of the brain which helps to maintain balance of the body. a ) cerebrum b ) cerebellum c ) medulla oblongata d ) thalamus 2. identify the relation and fill in the blank. irregular flow of charge in the brain : epilepsy decrease in the production of dopamine : - - - - - - - - - - - 3. analyse the following situations and answer the questions. • a thorn pierces the foot. • the leg is withdrawn. • the thorn is taken out slowly. a ) write the stimuli and responses. b ) was the leg withdrawn after sensing the pain? identify the reflex action. prepare an illustration showing the

parts through which the impulses were transmitted. • construct a model of the human brain using suitable scrap materials and exhibit it in the class. • prepare the script of a short play which contains the methods of first aid to be given to people who have met with accidents and present it. earthquake victims rescued katmantu : rescued victims who got trapped in the collapsed buildings due to earthquake in the eastern regions of katmantu, the capital of nepal. the rescue operation was difficult due to heavy rain and insufficient light. specially trained dogs helped to detect the victims and save their lives during the crisis. did you notice the news? why are dogs more capable than human beings in tracking the injured in such circumstances? discuss. the number of receptors in the sense organs is different in different organisms. the surface of a postage stamp is enough to arrange all the olfactory cells in the nose of a human being. but a large scarf is required to arrange the olfactory cells of a dog. now, you might have understood that the number of receptors influence the efficiency of sense organs. there are different types of receptors in our sense organs to receive stimuli. expand the given table by adding sense organs and their receptors. 22 biology - x

table 2. 1 sense organs and receptors $ eye $ ear $ tongue $ skin $ nose olfactory receptor smell sense organs receptor stimulus figure 2. 1 structure of the eye pupil iris cornea sclera choroid retina optic nerve lens conjunctiva yellow spot blind spot eye eye is the major sense organ that helps the brain to evoke sensation. how are the eyes protected? discuss and fill in the blanks. • eye socket : depressions in the skull • external eye muscles : fix the eye balls in the orbit • eyebrow : • eyelashes : • eyelids : • conjunctiva : secretes mucus which protects the anterior portion of the eye ball from being dry. • tears : clean and lubricate the anterior part of the eye ball. lysozyme, the enzyme present in tears, destroys germs that enter the eyes. how far is the structure of an eye adapted to perform its function? observe figure 2. 1 and illustration 2. 1. on the basis of the indicators, write your inferences in the science diary. 23 biology - x layers of the eye the white outer layer which gives firmness to the eye. made up of connective tissues. the middle layer which contains a large number of blood vessels. the inner layer which has photoreceptors. sclera choroid retina the layer which covers and protects the front part of sclera except the cornea. conjunctiva

the projected transparent anterior part of the sclera which refracts light rays to focus on the retina. cornea the part of the choroid seen behind the cornea. presence of the pigment melanin gives the iris a dark colour. the aperture seen at the centre of the iris. the size of this aperture increases and decreases depending on the intensity of light. pupil elastic transparent convex lens, connected to ciliary muscles by thread like ligaments. lens circular muscles seen around the lens. the contraction and relaxation of these muscles alter the curvature of lens. ciliary muscles the part of the retina where plenty of photoreceptors are present. it is the point of maximum visual clarity. the part of the retina from where the optic nerve begins. here there is no vision as photoreceptors are absent. blind spot transmits impulses from photoreceptors to the visual centre in the brain. optic nerve illustration 2. 1 the eye - parts and functions iris yellow spot 24 biology - x change in pupil in dim light change in pupil in bright light figure 2. 2 regulation of light in the eye circular muscles contractradial muscles contract indicators • layers of the eye and their function. • position and significance of lens and cornea. • position of iris and the pupil.

• location and function of fluids present in the eye. regulation of light in the eye the entry of a large amount of light is harmful to the tissues of the eye. iris and the aperture at its centre called pupil regulate the amount of light falling on the eyes. analyse figure 2. 2 and the description regarding the changes in the pupil in dim light and bright light, and form inferences. the size of the pupil is regulated by the action of circular muscles and radial muscles. when the radial muscles contract in dim light, the size of the pupil increases. when the circular muscles contract in intense light, the size of the pupil decreases. thus the amount of light falling on the lens is regulated according to the intensity of light. the jelly like substance seen in the vitreous chamber between the retina and the lens. helps in maintaining the shape of the eye. the fluids in the eye aqueous humor vitreous humor the water like fluid filled in the aqueous chamber between the lens and the cornea. it is formed from blood, and is reabsorbed into blood. provides oxygen and nourishment to the tissues of the eye. 25 biology - x lens distant object nearby object lens ciliary muscles ligaments while viewing distant objects while viewing nearby objects ciliary muscles ligaments

illustration 2. 2 while viewing distant and nearby objects figure 2. 3 formation of image while viewing nearby objects while viewing distant objects ciliary muscles contract ciliary muscles relax ligaments relax ligaments stretch curvature of lens. curvature of lens. focal length. focal length. table 2. 2 formation of image the curvature of the cornea and the lens help light rays which reflect from an object to get focussed on the retina. what are the peculiarities of the image formed by the lens of the eye? observe figure 2. 3 and list the peculiarities. discuss and modify. • • • real we can see nearby and distant objects clearly. this is because the focal length of the lens can be adjusted according to the distance of the object. analyse illustration 2. 2 which explains this and complete table 2. 2. write your inferences in the science diary. 26 biology - x figure 2. 4 rod cell and cone cell rod cell cone cell table 2. 3 pigment shape function the ability of the eye to adjust the focal length of the lens by changing its curvature in accordance to the distance of the object from the eye and form the image on the retina is called the power of accommodation of the eye. retina and the photoreceptors you might have understood that photoreceptors are present in

the retina. rod cells and cone cells are the photoreceptors in the retina. rod cells are more in number than cone cells. observe figure 2. 4 and relate the shape of photoreceptors with their names. analyse the description and compare the photoreceptors and complete table 2. 3. rod cells contain the visual pigment called rhodopsin. this pigment is formed from a protein named opsin and retinal which is a derivative of vitamin a. since they are activated even in dim light, we are able to see objects in dim light. these cells cannot detect colour. cone cells contain a pigment called photopsin. this is also called iodopsin. this pigment is also composed of opsin and retinal. there are three types of cone cells in our eyes, which help us to detect three primary colours of light – red, green and blue. this diversity is due to the difference in amino acids in the opsin molecule. so, cone cells provide us with colour vision. 27 biology - x photopsin retinal + opsin retinal + opsin light illustration 2. 3 formation of impulses in photoreceptors rhodopsin light impluse sense of sight figure 2. 5 sense of sight in the presence of light, the pigments present in photoreceptors, dissociate. this chemical change leads to the formation of impulses. these impulses are transmitted to the cerebrum

through optic nerves and this enables vision. indicators • factors present in the visual pigments. • formation of impulses in photoreceptors. • sense of sight. complete the flowchart related to the sense of sight given below. the chemistry of vision how are impulses formed in photoreceptors to make vision possible? analyse illustration 2. 3, figure 2. 5 and the description and write your inferences in the science diary. binocular vision aren ' t two images of the same object formed in our two eyes? but we see only one image of the object. how does this happen? 28 biology - x figure 2. 6 binocular vision try the activity given below. stretch your left hand forward. close your right eye and focus on the forefinger of your left hand. now close your left eye and without changing the direction of your head, focus on the same finger. do you notice any change in the position of the finger? observe figure 2. 6. the images from two sides of the same object are formed in the left and right eye. when these two images combine as a result of the activities of the brain, a three dimensional image of the object is formed. this is called binocular vision. eye – defects and diseases you are now aware of some of the eye defects. prepare a note on eye defects and their remedies. • myopia • •

let us familiarise ourselves with a few more eye defects and diseases. night blindness you have studied that the retinal, a part of the visual pigment, is derived from vitamin a. the deficiency of vitamin a results in the low production of retinal. this in turn prevents the resynthesis of rhodopsin. in this condition, objects cannot be seen clearly in dim light and this disease is called night blindness. xerophthalmia if there is a prolonged deficiency of vitamin a, the conjunctiva and cornea become dry and opaque. this causes xerophthalmia and leads ultimately to blindness. xerophthalmia 29 biology - x figure 2. 7 colour blindness observe figure 2. 7. can you read the figure clearly? you are aware that the retina contains cone cells which can detect red, green and blue colours. some persons cannot distinguish green and red colours due to the defect of cone cells. this condition is called colour blindness. can you guess why persons with colour blindness are not selected for military or for jobs like that of a driver, pilot etc? discuss. computer vision syndrome glaucoma aqueous humor is the fluid which nourishes the tissues in the eyes. if the reabsorption of aqueous humor does not occur, it causes an increase in the pressure inside the eyes. this causes damage

to the retina and the photoreceptor cells and ultimately leads to blindness. this defect is called glaucoma. it can be rectified by laser surgery. cataract it is a condition in which the lens of the eyes become opaque resulting in blindness. this can be rectified by replacing the lens with an artificial one, through surgery. conjunctivitis this is an infection of the conjunctiva. the causative organisms may be bacteria, virus etc. this disease is transmitted through contact and can be prevented by maintaining personal hygiene. protection of eyes what are the things to be taken care of to ensure the health of the eyes? the problems of the eyes caused by the excessive use of cell phones, computer, tablet etc is called computer vision syndrome. the continuous use of such devices affects the ability of the eye to focus. headache is its major symptom. drying of the eye, high pressure in the eye etc are other symptoms. 30 biology - x internal ear figure 2. 8 structure of the ear middle ear external ear may your eyes see this world even after death. eye donation life donation discuss on the basis of the indicators given below. indicators • food materials rich in vitamin a and health of the eye. • excessive use of mobile, computer etc and health of the eye. observe the poster.

prepare a presentation on the procedure of ' eye donation ' by collecting data and present it in the class. ear you have studied that auditory receptors are present in the ear. the ear not only helps us in hearing, but also in maintaining the balance of the body. observe figure 2. 8 and list the main parts of the ear. let us examine the main parts of the ear in detail. 31 biology - x ear ossicles amplify and transmit the vibrations of the tympanum to the internal ear. malleus incus eustachian tube connects the middle ear and the pharynx. protects the tympanum by balancing the pressure on either side of the tympanum. figure 2. 10 structure of the middle ear stapes figure 2. 9 external ear - parts pinna carries sound waves to the auditory canal. auditory canal carries sound waves to the tympanum. small hairs and wax present inside the canal help to prevent dust and foreign particles from entering the ear. tympanum a thin circular membrane that separates the middle ear from the external ear. it vibrates in resonance with sound waves. indicators • function of pinna. • importance of the auditory canal. middle ear analyse figure 2. 10 and prepare a table by including the parts of the middle ear and their functions. external ear observe figure 2. 9 and prepare a note on the basis of the

indicators. 32 biology - x upper chamber illustration 2. 4 cochlea and fluid movements lower chamber middle chamber oval window membrane seen attached to the stapes. spreads the vibration of ear ossicles to the inner ear. round window helps in the movement of fluid inside the cochlea. semicircular canals vestibular nerve cochlea auditory nerve vestibule figure 2. 11 structure of the internal ear the internal ear is situated inside a bony case in the skull called the bony labyrinth. in this bony case there are membraneous labyrinths as well. the space inside the membraneous labyrinth is filled with a fluid named endolymph. the space between the membraneous and bony labyrinth is filled with a fluid called perilymph. semicircular canals, vestibule and cochlea are the main parts of the internal ear. semicircular canals and vestibule help in balancing the body whereas cochlea helps in hearing. how is hearing possible? observe illustration 2. 4 of uncoiled cochlea. internal ear observe figure 2. 11 and understand the parts of the internal ear. 33 biology - x pinna oval windowhair cells impulse sense of hearing sound waves figure 2. 12 vestibule, semicircular canals hair cells in semicircular canal semicircular canals vestibule

cochlea is a coiled tube like a snail shell. it consists of three chambers. specialized sensory hair cells which are present in the basilar membrane that separates the middle and lower chambers, function as auditory receptors. the basilar membrane and sensory hair cells together constitute the organ of corti. the sound waves which pass through the external ear vibrate the tympanum. this vibration of the tympanum is transmitted to the ear ossicles which causes the vibration of the membrane in the oval window. this vibration further causes the movement of the fluid inside the cochlea. as a result, the sensory hair cells of the organ of corti of the cochlea are stimulated and impulses are generated. these impulses reach the cerebrum through the auditory nerve and hearing is effected. analyse illustration 2. 4 and the description and complete the flow chart given below by including the parts of the ear that bring about the sense of hearing. also prepare a note in your science diary. ear and body balancing doesn ’ t the ear help in maintaining the balance of the body? how is it possible? analyse figure 2. 12 and the description based on the indicators and prepare a flow chart on body balance maintaining. body balance is maintained in accordance with the

movement of the head. movements of the head bring about the movement of the endolymph present inside the vestibule and the semicircular canals. this causes movement of the sensory hair cells and generates impulses. these impulses are transmitted by the vestibular nerves to the cerebellum, and the equilibrium of the body is maintained. 34 biology - x figure 2. 13 receptors in the tongue papilla taste bud hearing aid deafness is caused by structural deformities or diseases of the ears. hearing aids are also included in the various methods of treatment of deafness. hearing aid is a small electronic equipment that can be fitted internally or behind the ear. hearing aids are a boon for the hearing impaired to work in the main stream of society. indicators • parts of the internal ear which help in body balance. • generation of impulses. to detect taste isn ' t taste, one of the reasons for enjoying the food we eat? what are the different types of tastes we can detect? analyse the description and figure 2. 13 given below, and understand the mechanisms about detecting taste. based on the indicators, prepare a flowchart on the method of detecting taste. chemoreceptors seen inside the mouth and tongue help us to detect taste. these are seen mainly on the surface of the

tongue. the projected structures seen on the surface of the tongue are called papillae. the parts seen on the papillae that detect taste are the taste buds. we have taste buds that are stimulated by tastes like sweet, salt, sour, bitter, umami etc. 35 biology - x mucus olfactory receptors olfactory nerve mucus glands olfactory receptors nasal cavity figure 2. 14 olfactory receptors diversity of tastes umami is a japanese term that means happiness. milk, meat, sea food, mushroom etc contain factors that provide the taste of umami. a sixth taste named oleogustus is also identified. it is the taste of lipid. each taste bud has chemoreceptors that help to detect different tastes. substances responsible for taste dissolve in saliva, stimulate the chemoreceptors and generate impulses. these impulses reach the brain through the respective nerves and we experience taste. indicators • taste buds • experience of taste. stages • aromatic particles diffuse in the air and enter the nostrils. • these aromatic particles dissolve in the mucus inside the nostrils. • • • isn ’ t there a possibility of not sensing the taste of food while suffering from common cold? discuss. to detect smell we have discussed olfactory receptors in the beginning of the unit. how do we detect smell?

analyse figure 2. 14 and complete the stages in the process of detecting smell in sequential order. 36 biology - x touch receptor pressure receptor temperature receptor pain receptor cold receptor figure 2. 15 receptors in the skin receptors in the skin you might have seen visually impaired people reading braille by touching with the tips of fingers. are these touch receptors uniformly distributed all over the skin? let us do this activity. take two refillers of any ball point pen. ask your friend to close his / her eyes and stretch his / her hand. place the two pointed tips of the refillers on the finger tip first and then on the wrist of your friend. ask your friend about the experience he / she has felt on the finger tip and the wrist. is there any difference in the experiences? if so, what might be the reason? can you now make out how visually impaired people read braille script using their finger tips? observe figure 2. 15 and understand the various receptors present in the skin to sense the different stimuli. receptors in various organisms all organisms have mechanisms to know their surroundings. the receptors of certain organisms and their peculiarities are included in illustration 2. 5. observe it and add your inferences in the science diary. 37 biology - x planaria eye spot

to detect light. shark lateral line there are receptors in the lateral line on either side of the body which help to detect the change in the balance of body. jacobson ’ s organ the aromatic particles that stick on the tongue of the snake reach jacobson ' s organ seen on the roof of the mouth cavity. the olfactory receptors seen there get stimulated then. snake housefly ommatidia formed of thousands of small eyes. the eye of an insect consists of a cluster of photoreceptors called ommatidia. illustration 2. 5 receptors in various organisms highly sensitive olfactory receptors. 1. select the right answer from the following : while viewing nearby objects. ( a ) ciliary muscles relax ( b ) curvature of lens decreases ( c ) ciliary muscles contract ( d ) focal length increases 2. identify the odd one and write down the common feature of the others. malleus, eustachian tube, stapes, incus now, have you understood that organisms recognise their surroundings with the help of the receptors present in the sense organs? this helps them to satisfy their needs and survive on this earth. 38 biology - x 3. redraw the figure. identify the parts according to the hints and label them. a. the part where the muscles that regulate the size of the pupil are seen. b. jelly like fluid.

c. the layer of eye where photoreceptors are seen. 4. figure of ear is given. redraw it and name and label the parts mentioned. a ) part that receives the vibrations of the ear drum. b ) the tube that connects the pharynx. c ) part where the auditory receptors are seen. • conduct a seminar in class on the topic ' eye diseases and protection of the eye '. • prepare notes on the peculiarities of sense organs of different organisms by collecting more information. did you notice the conversation between neenu and seena about the picture on the science club notice board? haven ' t you heard of hormones? which are the hormones you know? list them. • • • how is it that there is so much difference in height between the two? teacher said that it is a hormone related issue. 40 biology - x illustration 3. 1 hormone in the target cell cells hormone molecules hormone molecule in the receptor of cell membrane hormone receptor in the cell membrane blood the endocrine system is an organ system that controls and coordinates all activities in the body. this system includes endocrine glands and their secretions called hormones. hormones are chemical messengers that regulate cellular activities. endocrine glands do not have particular ducts to carry hormones

to various tissues. hence they are known as ductless glands. hormones are transported through blood. do the hormones transported through blood function in all cells? observe the description and illustration 3. 1 given below and discuss on the basis of indicators. note down the inference in the science diary. hormones to target cells hormones reach every cell in the body as they are transported by blood. but each hormone acts only upon those cells which have specific receptors. the cells which are acted upon by hormones are their target cells. only those cells having specific receptors can receive a specific hormone. each hormone molecule binds with the receptor to form a hormone - receptor complex. following this, enzymes are activated within the cell and certain changes occur in cellular activities. 41 biology - x islets of langerhans figure 3. 1 pancreas alpha cells beta cells indicators • target cells. • formation of hormone - receptor complex. • influence of hormone in target cells. let ’ s learn about the various hormones in our body in detail. after digestion you have learnt that glucose molecules formed as a result of digestion get absorbed into the blood. these glucose molecules must reach cells to produce energy. the gland called pancreas

plays a major role in this activity. have you tried to understand the role of pancreas in the digestive process? observe figure 3. 1 pancreas is the gland that is connected to the duodenum, the continuation of the stomach. the beta cells in the cell cluster of this gland called islets of langerhans, produce the hormone insulin and alpha cells produce the hormone glucagon. analyse illustration 3. 2 and understand the action of these hormones. 42 biology - x production of glucagon. production of insulin level of glucose in blood 70 - 110 mg / 100 ml high low production of glucagon. production of insulin the normal level of glucose in blood is 70 - 110mg / 100ml. the level of glucose in blood is maintained by the combined action of insulin and glucagon. complete illustration 3. 3 by including the production of hormones that regulate the level of glucose. illustration 3. 3 method of regulation of blood glucose level cellular uptake of glucose molecules. converts glucose into glycogen in the liver and muscles. insulin converts the glycogen stored in the liver to glucose. synthesizes glucose from amino acids. glucagon illustration 3. 2 action of insulin and glucagon 43 biology - x when insulin fails how does the deficiency of insulin or the

inability of cells to use insulin affect the body? discuss. based on the indicators, analyse the description given below and write notes in the science diary. decreased production of insulin due to the destruction of beta cells or the inability of cells to utilize the insulin produced, raises the level of glucose in blood. excess glucose in the blood is expelled through urine. normally, there is no glucose in urine. diabetes is clinically referred to as a condition when the level of glucose before breakfast is above 126mg / 100ml of blood. increased appetite and thirst and frequent urination are the major symptoms of diabetes. the blood test that precisely determines the level of glucose in blood for three months plays a crucial role in the diagnosis of diabetes. indicators • the reason for increase in the level of glucose in blood. • symptoms of diabetes and diagnosis. plan and conduct benedict test to detect the presence of glucose in urine with the help of your teacher. write the report in the science diary. take 2ml of the sample in a test tube. add 2ml benedict solution into it. heat for 2 minutes. observe the change in colour. formulate your inference by comparing the glucose indicator on the reagent bottle. diabetes the reason for type i diabetes is the defective

production of insulin. the reason for this is the destruction of pancreatic beta cells by t lymphocytes, a kind of white blood cells. providing insulin in proper quantity is the treatment method. the reason for type 2 diabetes is the inability of target cells to make use of insulin. obesity and gene defects are the reasons for this disease. this can be controlled through exercise, control of food and use of medicines, if necessary. the world health organisation ( who ) and international diabetic federation jointly observes november 14 as world diabetes day every year. its purpose is to create awareness against the increase in diabetes. blue circle is its logo. 44 biology - x thyroid test since the activities of the thyroid gland are extensive, disorders of thyroid should be detected through test. disorders are detected by testing the quantity of hormones directly secreted by the thyroid gland and by testing the quantity of certain other hormones that influence the thyroid gland. laboratory tests that determine the level of hormones like t3, t4, tsh are used for this. figure 3. 2 thyroid gland regulation of metabolism the anabolic and catabolic processes taking place in the body are commonly referred as metabolism. metabolic activities are also under

the control of hormones. the thyroid gland is the main endocrine gland that controls the metabolic activities. observe figure 3. 2 and find out the position of the thyroid gland. the thyroid gland secretes two hormones – thyroxine and calcitonin. pay attention to the functions of thyroxine listed below : • increases energy production. • raises the rate of metabolism. • accelerates the growth and development of the brain in the foetal stage and infancy. • regulates growth in children. how does the rise or fall of the thyroxine level affect the body? analyse the description given below on the basis of indicators and prepare notes in the science diary. hypothyroidism this is a condition in which the production of thyroxine decreases. the decrease in production of thyroxine during the foetal stage or infancy, hinders proper physical and mental development. this condition is cretinism. prolonged deficiency of thyroxine in adults leads to a condition called myxoedema. low metabolic rate, sluggishness, increase in body weight, hypertension, inflammation in body tissues are the major symptoms of this disorder. cretinism myxoedema hyperthyroidism this is a condition in which all life activities controlled by thyroxine accelerate due

to the continuous and excessive production of thyroxine. high metabolic rate, rise in body temperature, excessive sweating, increased heart beat, weight loss, emotional imbalance are the major symptoms. 45 biology - x level of calcium in blood 9 - 11 mg / 100ml thyroid gland secretes calcitonin parathyroid gland secretes parathormone. increasesdecreases regulates the level illustration 3. 4 regulation of level of calcium in blood • prevents the process of mixing of calcium from bones to blood. • stores the excess calcium from blood to bones. • reabsorbs calcium from kidneys to blood. • prevents the storage of calcium in bones. goitre iodine is essential for the production of thyroxine. the production of thyroxine is blocked in the absence of iodine. in an attempt to produce more thyroxine, the thyroid gland enlarges. this condition is called goitre. indicators • the importance of thyroxine in controlling life activities. • the problems caused by excessive production of thyroxine. • the disabilities due to thyroxine deficiency. • the relation between iodine and thyroid gland. regulation of level of calcium the normal level of calcium in blood is 9 - 11 mg / 100ml. when the level of calcium in blood increases, the thyroid gland secretes

a hormone named calcitonin. it lowers the level of calcium in blood. what happens if there is a decrease in the level of calcium in blood? the parathyroid gland situated behind the thyroid gland secretes a hormone called parathormone. this hormone increases the level of calcium in blood. the action of parathormone and calcitonin is antagonistic. analyse illustration 3. 4 showing how the action of these hormones maintains the level of calcium in blood. prepare notes. figure 3. 4 parathyroid gland figure 3. 3 goitre 46 biology - x cortisol : the synthesis of glucose from protein and fat. slows down the action of defense cells. controls inflammation and allergy. aldosterone : maintains the salt - water level by acting in kidneys. maintains blood pressure. sex hormones : controls the development and functions of sex organs. epinephrine ( adrenaline ) : acts along with the symp athetic nervous system during emergency. thus, we can resist or withdraw ourselves from such situations. norepinephrine ( noradrenaline ) : acts along with epinephrine. illustration 3. 5 hormones secreted by the adrenal gland outer cortex inner medulla during emergencies the hormones secreted by the adrenal gland equip the body to act during emergencies. prepare notes on the position and

peculiarities of the gland using illustration 3. 5 and indicators. - the gland only upto youth! thymus is an endocrine gland situated behind the sternum. this gland is very active during infancy but constricts as we reach puberty. this gland produces a hormone called thymosin. it is also known as ' youth hormone '. the major function of this gland is to control the activities and maturation of t lymphocytes which help to impart immunity. indicators • position and parts of the adrenal gland. • hormonal actions that overcome emergency situations. • hormones produced by the cortex and their functions. the action of epinephrine and norepinephrine prolongs body activities for a longer time, when the sympathetic system gets stimulated. this hormone activity is an example for the coordinated activity of the nervous system and the endocrine system. figure 3. 5 thymus 47 biology - x figure 3. 7 pituitary gland hypothalamus posterior lobe of pituitary anterior lobe of pituitary nerve fibreportal vein pineal gland figure 3. 6 pineal gland biological clock sleeping and waking up are examples for rhythmic bodily activities. these kinds of activities are controlled by the pineal gland, seen at the centre of the brain. melatonin, the hormone produced by this gland helps

to maintain the rhythm of our daily activities. the production of melatonin is high at night and low during the day. how does the presence of melatonin influence sleep and waking up? discuss and write down the inferences. this hormone also controls the reproductive activities of organisms that have definite reproductive periods. behind growth growth of the body takes place under the control of hormones. the pituitary gland produces the hormone responsible for growth. analyse figure 3. 7 and write down the structure and position of the pituitary gland in the science diary. 48 biology - x the hormone that promotes growth of the body during its growth phase is the growth hormone ( somatotropin ). analyse the description given below and draw inferences on how the variation in the production of this hormone affects growth. if the production of somatotropin increases during the growth phase, it leads to the excessive growth of the body. this condition is called gigantism. it leads to another stage called dwarfism when its production decreases during the growth phase. acromegaly is the condition caused by the excessive production of somatotropin after the growth phase. it is characterised by the growth of the bones on the face, jaws and fingers.

the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland produces hormones which regulate the functions of other endocrine glands. these are tropic hormones. hence, the pituitary gland has great significance in the endocrine system. analyse table 3. 1 showing the hormones produced by the anterior lobe of the pituitary and write down the inferences in the science diary. figure 3. 9 an acromegaly affected person figure 3. 8 dwarfism and gigantism hormones secreted by the anterior functionlobe of the pituitary gland table 3. 1 thyroid stimulating hormone ( tsh ) adreno cortico tropic hormone ( acth ) gonado tropic hormone ( gth ) growth hormone ( gh ) somato tropic hormone ( sth ) prolactin stimulates the activity of the thyroid gland. stimulates the activity of adrenal cortex. stimulates the activity of testes in males and ovaries in females. promotes the growth of the body. production of milk. 49 biology - x raises the quantity of urine. normal level of water in blood production of vasopressin increases decreases the production of vasopressin increases the reabsorption of water in the kidneys. decreases increases maintains the level of water illustration 3. 6 maintenance of the level of water in blood lowers the quantity of urine. decreases the reabsorption of water in the kidneys. hormone function

• facilitates child birth by stimulating the oxytocin contraction of smooth muscles in the uterine wall. • facilitates lactation. vasopressin or anti diuretic • helps in the reabsorption of water in the hormone ( adh ) kidney. table 3. 2 childbirth, breast feeding, maintenance of water balance the hormones oxytocin and vasopressin, which are secreted from the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland are produced by special neuro secretory cells of the hypothalamus. the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland stores these hormones and releases into blood when required. analyse figure 3. 7, and table 3. 2 and prepare notes. vasopressin regulates the level of water in the body through the reabsorption of water in kidneys. based on the indicators, discuss illustration 3. 6 given below and write notes in the science diary. the production of vasopressin is high in the summer season during which water loss is excessive through sweat. but its production is less during the winter and rainy season. find out the reason for the change in quantity of urine expelled during the summer and rainy season? 50 biology - x estrogen controls secondary sexual characters, ovulation, menstrual cycle etc. progesterone controls ovulation, menstrual cycle and implantation of embryo in the uterus. testosterone

controls secondary sexual characters ( change in voice, growth of hair, development of reproductive organs ) and sperm production. illustration 3. 7 sex hormones ovary testis how does decrease in the secretion of vasopressin affect the body? note down your assumption. when the production of vasopressin decreases, the reabsorption of water in the kidney is decreased and excess amount of urine is eliminated. this condition is known as diabetes insipidus. frequent urination, increased thirst etc., are the symptoms. indicators • the function of vasopressin in kidneys. • production of vasopressin and quantity of urine. • diabetes insipidus. behind sexual characteristics the ovary and testis secrete sex hormones. analyse illustration 3. 7 and prepare a table by including hormones, centre of production and function. prime controller hypothalamus, a part of the brain is an endocrine gland too. it controls the pituitary gland and thereby other endocrine glands. based on the indicators, analyse illustration 3. 8 and write down inferences in the science diary. 51 biology - x illustration 3. 8 the relation between hypothalamus and pituitary gland inhibits the production of tropic hormones in the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland. hypothalamus

stimulates the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and secretes tropic hormones. inhibitory hormone releasing hormone the hypothalamus controls the pituitary gland and thereby the entire endocrine system by producing a variety of releasing hormones and inhibitory hormones. indicators • action of releasing hormone. • action of inhibitory hormone. • action of hypothalamus as prime controller. chemical messages for communication haven ’ t you noticed ants moving in a line along a particular trail? the reason behind this movement is the production of certain chemical substances. such chemical substances that are secreted by certain animals to the surroundings to facilitate communication are called pheromones. pheromones help in attracting mates, informing the availability of food, determining the path of travel, signalling dangers etc. the chemical messages of pheromones also help honey bees and termites to live in colonies. the muscone in the musk deer, the civeton in the civet cat, bombykol in the female silk worm moth etc., are examples for pheromones. artificial pheromones are used for pest control in agricultural fields. 52 biology - x auxin cell growth, cell elongation, promoting the growth of terminal buds, fruit formation. cytokinin cell growth, cell division, cell

differentiation. gibberellin stimulates break down of stored food to facilitate germination, sprouting of leaves illustration 3. 9 plant hormones abscisic acid dormancy of embryo, dropping of ripened leaves and fruits. ethylene ripening of leaves and fruits, excess amount of ethylene causes dropping of leaves and fruits. plants too have hormones plant hormones control and coordinate life activities in plants. these are also called plant growth regulators. observe illustration 3. 9 which shows plant hormones and their functions. complete table 3. 3 suitably. 53 biology - x hormones also make the fruits seedless seedless orange, grape and watermelon are produced by using artificial auxin. this process of formation of fruit from the ovary without fertilization is called parthenocarpy. gibberellins also lead to parthenocarpy. artificial auxins like naphthelene acetic acid ( naa ), indol butyric acid ( iba ) etc., are used to prevent the dropping of premature fruits and for the sprouting of roots. 2, 4 - d ( 2, 4 - dichloro phenoxy acetic acid ) is used as a weedicide. artificial plant hormones plant hormones are synthesized artificially by identifying the chemical structure of the hormones. use of such hormones has contributed a lot to the progress of the

agricultural sector. let us familiarise ourselves with some such artificial plant hormones. auxins it is used in the agricultural field to prevent the dropping of premature fruits, for the sprouting of roots and as a weedicide. gibberellins it is used for increasing fruit size in grapes and apple and also for preventing ripening of fruits to assist marketing. plant hormones function auxin abscisic acid break down of stored food in the seed helps in the ripening of fruits table 3. 3 ethylene ethylene is used for the flowering of pineapple plants at a time and for the ripening of tomato, lemon, orange etc. ethyphon, a chemical which is available in liquid form, gets transformed into ethylene, when used in rubber trees and it increases the production of latex. abscisic acid it is used for harvesting fruits at the same time. 54 biology - x 1. identify the word - pair relationship and fill in the blank. thyroxine : thyroid gland epinephrine : … … … … … … … 2. analyse the information given in the box and answer the questions. x - the production of this hormone is more in night and less in day time. y - hormones from the adrenal gland work along with the sympathetic system. ( a ) identify and name the hormone ' x ' and its gland. ( b ) identify the hormones indicated as ' y '.

by now, you are familiar with plant hormones too. it is a fact that the uncontrolled use of these chemicals causes many health and environmental issues. hormones play a major role in the control and co - ordination of life activities. they are the chemical messages that help to maintain the homeostasis of body activities. the nervous system and endocrine system work along with each other to ensure homeostasis in animals. 55 biology - x adrenal testes hypothalamus pituitary thyroid pancreas ovaries ( in females ) pineal parathyroid thymus gland location hormones 3. analyse the illustration and complete the table appropriately. 56 biology - x 4. the hormone that helps in the reabsorption of water in the kidneys. ( a ) tsh ( b ) acth ( c ) adh ( d ) gth • conduct a seminar on the topic – the role of the endocrine system in maintaining homeostasis. • conduct a debate on ' use of artificial plant hormones - problems and possibilities '. • collect information about novel laboratory tests related to diagnosis of diabetes and conduct an exhibition on world diabetes day. kerala withstood the incomparable floods with unity. what threatended the state again, soon after the great floods? analyse the news reports and present the findings. $ $ 58 biology - x

illustration 4. 1 modes of transmission of diseases by contact contaminated food and water cough, sneezing unsterilized equipments cloth vectors what are the reasons for the spread of diseases in such situations? discuss. c onditions suitable for the multiplication and transmission of pathogens exist in abundance and this may cause the spread of various communicable diseases. most of the pathogens are microorganisms. microorganisms and diseases you have learnt that there are many microorganisms that are useful to humans. but some of them are pathogens. expand the list given below by including pathogenic microorganisms. • bacteria • • • not only humans, but other animals and plants are also affected by these pathogens. how are pathogens transmitted from one person to another? analyse illustration 4. 1 given below and formulate inferences. 59 biology - x figure 4. 1 leptospira bacteria collect information on other modes of transmission of diseases and expand the illustration. identify various methods for the prevention of communicable diseases, prepare a similar illustration and exhibit it in the classroom. a possible disease that may spread in flood affected areas is rat fever. analyse the information given below on the cause, mode of transmission and preventive measures of

rat fever and write notes in the sicence diary. rat fever ( leptospirosis ) rat fever is a bacterial disease. bacteria is a prokaryote. they enter the body and multiply through binary fission. the toxins produced by them destroy cells and cause disease. leptospira is the bacteria that causes rat fever. the bacteria that comes out through the urine of rat, dog and certain other animals remain alive in stagnant water and moisture. when bacteria reach blood through wounds, they affect body cells and produce certain toxins. they cause damage to blood capillaries which in turn leads to internal bleeding. severe fever, headache, muscle precautions after flood the department of health has given numerous instructions to avoid health issues that may arise after overcoming the emergency situations. drinking boiled water and water purified using enough quantity of chlorine prevents water borne diseases. as there is a chance for the multiplication of mosquitoes in stagnant water, proper measures to check increase in mosquitoes should be adopted. for controlling diseases like rat fever, eliminate the vectors and take preventive medicines as per the directions of experts. disease affected persons must undergo diagnostic tests to confirm their illness and should take proper

medicines. people living in unsafe places must shift to safe places as per instructions. ensure personal hygiene and environmental hygiene at the rehabilitation centres and create an atmosphere to protect health. 60 biology - x figure 4. 2 coating in the throat caused by diphtheria bacteria pain, redness in eyes, etc. are the major symptoms. rat fever can be completely cured through early diagnosis and treatment. the realization that immunization is better than treatment is very important to stop the spread of disease. what are the measures to be taken to prevent the transmission of rat fever? discuss and present suggestions. bacteria cause many other diseases like rat fever. other bacterial diseases diphtheria diphtheria spreads through cough, sneezing or directly from the infected person to another person. analyse the information and figure 4. 2 related to diphtheria and prepare a table including the pathogen, symptoms and treatment for the disease. diphtheria affects the mucus membrane of the nose and the throat. corynebacterium diphtheriae is the pathogen. toxins produced by the bacteria cause fever, throat pain and inflammation in the lymph glands of the throat. cells in the mucus membrane which are destroyed by the toxins produce an ash coloured thick coating in the

throat within two or three days. gradually brain, heart and kidneys are affected. antitoxins which act against the toxins are used to protect the uninfected cells. but, if the disease becomes severe the patient cannot be recovered through medication. so vaccination is the best preventive method. 61 biology - x medicine for nipah virus arrived medicine for nipah virus arrived medicine for nipah virus arrived medicine for nipah virus arrived medicine for nipah virus arrived nipah spreads as a scarenipah spreads as a scarenipah spreads as a scarenipah spreads as a scarenipah spreads as a scare pathogen mycobacterium tuberculosis. major symptoms loss of body weight, fatigue, persistent cough transmission of disease when the patient speaks, coughs or sneezes, the pathogens spread into the air and thereby to others. treatment by administering antibiotics vaccine bcg is used as preventive vaccine against tuberculosis. organs / body parts affected tuberculosis mainly affects the lungs. but kidneys, bones, joints, brain etc. are also affected by this disease. tuberculosis tuberculosis was a dreadful disease earlier. analyse the information given below and prepare a wall magazine on the main points relating to tuberculosis. prepare a chart based on the information collected on

the national tuberculosis prevention programme and exhibit it in the class. collect additional information on other bacterial diseases and their mode of transmission and prepare a table. exhibit it in the class. viral diseases haven ’ t you noticed the news reports? nipah was the most fatal of the diseases that kerala faced recently. this is a viral disease. analyse illustration 4. 2 and find out how nipah virus causes the disease. based on the indicators, prepare notes in the science diary. virus virus has the simple structure with a dna or rna molecule within a protein coat. virus has no cell organelles as seen in normal cells. hence virus multiplies by taking control over the genetic mechanism of the host cells. viruses infect not only human beings but also plants, other animals and even bacteria. 62 biology - x illustration 4. 2 nipah virus and transmission of the disease fruit eating bats as the nipah virus vectors pigs remains of fruits eaten by bats nipah viruses saliva and urine of bats saliva and urine of bats figure 4. 3 hiv aids aids ( acquired immuno deficiency syndrome ) is a dreadful disease that has gripped the world by fear. lymphocytes play a major role in providing immunity to the body. hiv ( human immuno deficiency virus ) enters the body and multiplies using

the genetic mechanism of lymphocytes. hence the number of lymphocytes decreases considerably and reduces the immunity of the body. various other pathogens which enter the body in such a situation make the condition of aids even more fatal. indicators • natural vector of nipah virus. • situations that enable the virus to enter humans. haven ’ t you heard of aids? a note on this disease is given below. on the basis of the indicators, discuss the note and write your inferences in the science diary. 63 biology - x through sexual contact with hiv infected person from hiv infected mother to the foetus by sharing needle and syringe contaminated with hiv components through the reception of blood and organs contaminated with hiv illustration 4. 3 mode of transmission of aids indicators • how does hiv multiply in the human body? • the number of lymphocytes and aids. • condition that makes aids fatal. what are the ways by which one gets infected with hiv? write your inferences in the science diary by analysing illustration 4. 3 given below. aids does not spread. • by touch, shaking hands, coughing, sneezing etc. • through insects like mosquitoes, houseflies etc. • by staying together and sharing food. • by using the same toilet. • by taking bath in the same pond.

should we be scared of aids patients? what should be our attitude towards them? discuss. hepatitis hepatitis is a liver disease. hepatitis is also caused by virus. inflammation of the liver is its major symptom. when the flow of bile secreted by the liver is blocked, an increase in the level of bile pigment called bilirubin in blood is noticed. this imparts dark yellow colour to the 64 biology - x figure 4. 4 fungal diseases ringworm athletes ' foot dandruff when dead cells fall off, skin cells are continuously regenerated. at times the cells divide faster than falling off and become scales. this condition is dandruff. certain fungi that affect the skin at this time cause itching and other infections. the scales may fall off as white dusts and may cause loss of hair. mucus membrane, white portion of the eyes and the nails. this is the external symptom of the disease. disease gets transmitted through contaminated food and water, blood components and excreta of the patient. certain hepatitis do get transmitted in the same way as the transmission of hiv. discuss the preventive measures of this disease and present your inferences. hepatitis can also occur due to reasons other than virus infection. collect more information about such reasons.

dengue fever and chikunguya that are common in kerala are also viral diseases. these diseases are transmitted through mosquitoes. discuss the precautions to be taken to prevent the transmission of these diseases. collect information on other viral diseases and their modes of transmission and prepare a table. exhibit it in the class. fungal diseases fungi are of various types. some fungi are pathogenic. the toxins produced by the fungi cause diseases. analyse figure 4. 4 and the description on some fungal diseases that affect human beings and prepare a table enlisting the diseases, symptoms and modes of transmission. ringworm is a skin disease caused by certain types of fungi. the disease manifests as round, red blisters on the skin. this disease spreads through contact. athletes ’ foot is a fungal infection which manifests on the sole of the foot and between the toes. appearance of reddish scaly rashes that cause itching is the major symptom. pathogens enter through the toes when they come in contact with contaminated water and soil. 65 biology - x pathogen plasmodium vector female anopheles mosquito host human illustration 4. 4 malarial infection diseases caused by protozoa protozoans are unicellular eukaryotes. malaria is an

example of a disease caused by protozoa. prepare a note by analysing illustration 4. 4 and the information give on malaria. high fever with shivering and profuse sweating are the major symptoms of malaria. other symptoms include headache, vomitting, diarrhoea, anaemia, etc. worms as pathogens filariasis is caused by filarial worms that are spread by culex mosquitoes. the worms stay in the lymph ducts and obstruct the flow of lymph by blocking the ducts. this causes swelling in the lymph ducts. polluted surroundings promote the multiplication of pathogens. the increase in the number of vectors like mosquitoes, houseflies etc leads to the spread of communicable diseases much beyond control. in order to control the spread of communicable diseases, it is necessary to avoid situations that lead to the multiplication of pathogens and vectors. it is our duty to keep our surroundings clean. what is the significance of observing ' dry day ' in schools and at home? discuss. 66 biology - x geneticdeficiency of nutrients lifestyle diseases illustration 4. 5 non - communicable diseases occupational occupational diseases occupational diseases are caused by situations in work sites. some examples for occupational diseases are given below. : pneumoconiosis,

affecting the labourers engaged in coal mining ; silicosis, affecting mining workers related to gold, tin, mica and labourers in quarry ; pottery and ceramics. asbestosis, affecting workers in asbestos factories. nonpathogenic diseases are diseases caused only by pathogens? are they caused by other factors too? observe illustration 4. 5. have you learnt about diseases caused by the deficiency of nutrients? let ’ s examine other reasons and conditions that cause diseases. genetic diseases genetic diseases are caused by defects in the genes that control the cellular activities. haemophilia, sickle cell anaemia, etc. are examples of genetic diseases. haemophilia blood clots with the help of some proteins present in blood plasma. what will happen when the genes that control protein synthesis become defective? discuss. haemophilia is the condition in which excess blood is lost even through minor wounds. as haemophilia is a genetic disease, a complete cure is not possible at present. temporary relief is brought in by identifying and injecting the deficient protein. 67 biology - x red blood cells bend like sickle. the oxygen carrying capacity of red blood cells decreases. the sickle shaped rbcs get collected in the blood vessels and block the flow of blood in them.

illustration 4. 6 sickle cell anaemia changes occur in the structure of haemoglobin in red blood cells. there are social organisations which work for haemophilia patients who need special care and attention. these organisations volunteer to provide adequate care to haemophilia patients and make their relatives and the public aware of it. sickle cell anaemia the defects in genes may also cause deformities in the sequencing of amino acids which are the building blocks of haemoglobin. as a result of this, the structure of haemoglobin changes and this in turn decreases its oxygen carrying capacity. observe the changes that occur in the red blood cells of sickle cell anaemia patients given in illustration 4. 6. write your inferences in the science diary based on the indicators given. indicators • why do haemophilia patients lose blood excessively, even through minor wounds? • how does the deformity of red blood cells in sickle cell anaemia patients affect their body? cancer cancer is caused by the uncontrolled division of cells and their spread to other tissues. the normal cells get transformed into cancerous cells when the control system of cell division fails. this may be due to environmental factors, smoking, radiations, virus,

hereditary factors, etc. the disease may become complicated with 68 biology - x illustration 4. 7 cancer cells normal cells cancer cells india - the world capital of diabetes hypertension - the silent killer lack of exercise – the main reasonfor increase in cardiac diseases changes in food habits : the number of obese people on the rise the spread of cancer cells to other parts of the body through blood and lymph. don ' t these newspaper reports point to the ill effects of unhealthy life styles? surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy etc., are extensively used in the treatment of cancer. as recovery from the disease is difficult if the disease becomes severe, early diagnosis of the disease is crucial in the treatment of cancer. discuss with cancer specialists about the life style and food habits that will help us to get rid of cancer. also collect more information in this regard from other sources. what is the importance of voluntary organisations that offer palliative care to cancer patients? love and care are as important as food and medicines. discuss. look at the collage. cancer and kerala the studies conducted by the regional cancer center in thiruvananthapuram has revealed that every year there are more than 50, 000 newly affected cancer patients in kerala and about 20

percent of cancer are due to some components in food. 50 percent of cancer among males are related to mouth, throat and lungs. the main reasons identified for this are smoking and alcoholism. though the rate of infected persons are increasing, the number of people recovering from the disease is also on a steady increase. even though cancer is a genetic disease, it is not considered as a hereditary disease. 69 biology - x table 4. 1 different lifestyle diseases disease cause diabetes deficiency of insulin or its malfunctioning fatty liver deposition of excess fat in the liver stroke rupture of blood vessels in the brain, block of blood flow hypertension decrease in the diameter of arteries due to deposition of fat heart attack block of blood flow due to deposition of fat in coronary arteries which carry blood to the heart. • stroke • addiction to nicotine • lung cancer • bronchitis • emphysema • hypertension • loss of elasticity of arteries • decrease in functional efficiency illustration 4. 8 smoking and health hazards lifestyle diseases lifestyle diseases are caused by unhealthy living styles. the changes in food habits, lack of physical exercise, mental stress, bad habits like consumption of alcohol, drug abuse, smoking, etc. lead to various lifestyle diseases.

analyse table 4. 1 about certain lifestyle diseases and conduct a classroom presentation on healthy habits to be followed to avoid such diseases. observe illustration 4. 8 on some of the health problems associated with smoking. 70 biology - x table 4. 2 some animal diseases disease pathogen anthrax, inflammation of udder bacteria foot and mouth disease virus pathogen disease blight disease in paddy, bacteria wilt disease in brinjal virus mosaic disease in peas and tapioca, bunchy top of banana fungus quick wilt in pepper, bud rot of coconut. table 4. 3 some plant diseases collect more information on the bad effects of smoking and write it in your science diary. conduct a poster exhibition to make people aware of drug abuse. animal diseases not only human beings, but animals are also affected by diseases. observe table 4. 2 about some animal diseases. elaborate the table by including details of other animal diseases. plant diseases plants are also affected by various diseases. examine table 4. 3 to identify some of the plant diseases caused by microorganisms like bacteria, virus and fungi. collect more information on plant diseases that adversely affect food production and write it in your science diary.

you may also make use of agricultural publications for collecting additional information. 71 biology - x try to understand the problems faced by farmers in your locality and participate in preventive activities against plant diseases. the state of complete physical, mental and social well - being of a person is called health. healthy people are the real wealth of a society. the attitude towards patients is as important as keeping away from diseases by practising healthy habits. it is our duty to console those who are affected by noncurable and fatal diseases. 1. which among the following is not a bacterial disease? a. tuberculosis b. nipah c. diphtheria d. anthrax 2. “ food safety will be adversely affected with the spread of plant diseases. ” a. do you agree with this statement? why? b. give two examples of plant diseases. 3. prepare a pamphlet including the major measures to be taken to prevent rat fever. 4. what is the importance of vaccination in preventing diphtheria? 5. what health habits should be adopted to prevent lifestyle diseases? • prepare a check list and collect information on various lifestyle diseases. find out the lifestyle diseases that are observed commonly. • prepare and exhibit posters highlighting the fact that social

hygiene is as important as personal hygiene. constitution of india part iv a fundamental duties of citizens article 51 a fundamental duties - it shall be the duty of every citizen of india : ( a ) to abide by the constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the national flag and the national anthem ; ( b ) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom ; ( c ) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of india ; ( d ) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so ; ( e ) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of india transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities ; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women ; ( f ) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture ; ( g ) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers, wild life and to have compassion for living creatures ; ( h ) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform ; ( i ) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence ; ( j ) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour

and achievements ; ( k ) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between age of six and fourteen years. forests have a great role in conserving the health of the environment in which we live. forests are decisive in many respects. source of the water we drink and the air we breathe, balancing atmospheric temperature, determining weather, managing agriculture, source of our food etc., are some of those areas. wild animals inhabit forests. each animal has a function to perform in the environment in which it lives. thus wild animals have a vital role in aspects like pollination of plants, dispersal of seeds, sustenance of forests etc. it is our duty to protect and preserve forests, lakes, rivers, wild animals etc, which are all part of our nature. also, article 51 ( g ) of our constitution reminds every citizen of india to have a compassion for living creatures. activities taken up for the conservation of forests and wild life by the forest department : • establishing forestry clubs in schools, for spreading knowledge about forests. • establishing eco - tourism centres as a part of encouraging eco - friendly tourism. • conducting nature study camps as a part of forest and wild life education. • making public places green.

• providing financial aid to conserve ' kaavu '. • turtle conservation project. • instituting ' vanamitra award ' for promoting creative contributions in the field of green projects. • instituting ' prakritimitra award ' for conserving habitats outside forests and biodiversity. • conducting the ' citizen conservator programme ' for ensuring the role of public in forest conservation. toll free number of forest department : 18004254733 its high time we protected nature and natural resources ….! for further reading ( evaluation not required ) let us assess extended activities certain icons are used in this textbook for convenience haven ’ t you observed the picture of people wearing protective masks in places where epidemics spread out? what are the uses of wearing masks in such situations? • prevent the entry of germs. • can such precautions prevent the entry of pathogens into the body to a certain extent? doesn ’ t our body have its own natural defense mechanisms to prevent the entry of pathogens? list them. 80 biology - x illustration 5. 1 defense mechanisms defense mechanisms in our body body coverings and secretions ( skin, mucous membrane, mucous, saliva, tear, etc. ) body fluids ( blood, lymph ) defense is the ability of the body to prevent the entry of pathogens

and to destroy those that have already entered the body. our body is well equipped with a variety of defense mechanisms. observe illustration ( 5. 1 ) and prepare a note on the defense mechanisms in our body. body coverings and secretions skin is the protective covering of the body. it is a safety shield that prevents the entry of germs. analyse figure ( 5. 1 ) and the description given below and prepare notes based on the indicators. sebaceous gland : sebum produced by the gland makes the skin oily and water proof. sweat gland : the disinfectants present in the sweat produced by this gland destroys the germs. figure 5. 1 the skin and its defense mechanism epidermis : a protein called keratin present here prevents the entry of germs. 81 biology - x figure 5. 2 mucous membrane table 5. 1 part of the body secretion ear.. lysozyme in saliva eye.. hcl mucus in nose lysozyme in saliva mucus in trachea hcl in stomach mucus in intestine lysozyme in tears ear wax lysozyme in urine illustration 5. 2 body secretions and defense mechanisms the mucous membrane is another protective covering of body parts ( figure 5. 2 ). pathogens trapped in the mucus produced by this membrane, get destroyed. the destroyed germs are expelled out by the cilia cells of the mucous membrane.

coverings of the body act as a habitat for many useful bacteria. the germs that enter the body need to compete with such useful bacteria for shelter and nutrients. a great number of germs get destroyed in this competition. indicators • skin and defense • mucus membrane and defense you have understood that body secretions like sweat, mucus, etc. destroy germs. which are the other secretions that help to defend pathogens? analyse illustration ( 5. 2 ) and complete table ( 5. 1 ) given below. 82 biology - x defense action engulfs bacteria, synthesizes chemicals that destroy bacteria. stimulates other white blood cells. dilates the blood vessels. white blood cells neutrophil basophil eosinophil illustration 5. 3 white blood cells and defense actions engulfs and destroys germs. monocyte identifies and destroys germs specifically. lymphocyte aren ’ t you convinced of how body coverings and secretions prevent the entry of germs? body fluids and defense body fluids like blood and lymph play an important role in defense mechanism. these body fluids follow different defense strategies like controlling the entry of germs into the body, neutralising germs and the toxic substances they produce, preventing their multiplication, etc. let us examine how blood plays its role in the defense system.

blood and defense white blood cells play a significant role in defense. analyse illustration 5. 3 and prepare notes on the role of white blood cells in defense. synthesizes chemicals that destroy foreign bodies. synthesizes chemicals required for the inflammatory responses. you have understood the defense actions of white blood cells. now let us familiarise with the different strategies of defense. 83 biology - x germs enter through wounds. chemicals are produced illustration 5. 4 inflammatory response 1 blood capillaries dilate. 2 white blood cells reach the wound site through the walls of the capillaries. 3 neutrophils and monocytes engulf and destroy germs. 4 5 inflammatory response haven ’ t you noticed that when a wound occurs, that part swells up? this is called inflammatory response. illustration ( 5. 4 ) explains how the inflammatory response takes place. analyse it with the help of indicators and description, and prepare a note on it. the cells that get damaged by a wound or by an infection produce certain chemical substances. these substances dilate the capillaries thereby increasing the blood flow. blood plasma and more white blood cells reach the wound site. this is the reason for the swelling of the wound site. this defense mechanism is known as inflammatory response.

indicators • the advantage of dilation of capillaries at the wound site. • role of white blood cells in the inflammatory response. • inflammatory response and defense. you have understood that the germs at the wound site are engulfed and destroyed by the white blood cells. how does this process take place? 84 biology - x illustration 5. 6 blood clotting thromboplastin calcium, vitamin k thrombin pathogen engulfs pathogen in the membrane sac. lysosome lysosome combines with membrane sac. the pathogens are degenerated and destroyed by the enzymes in lysosome. illustrartion 5. 5 phagocytosis phagocytosis phagocytosis is the process of engulfing and destroying of germs. the cells that are engaged in this process are called phagocytes. ( phago - to engulf, cyte - cell ). the white blood cells, namely monocytes and neutrophils are phagocytes. analyse illustration ( 5. 5 ) and write notes on the stages of phagocytosis in the science diary. blood clotting blood clotting is also a defense mechanism. the changes that take place during blood clotting is consolidated below. analyse and understand the different stages in the process of blood clotting and prepare a note on it. • tissues and platelets at the site of wound degenerate to form the enzyme called thromboplastin.

• prothrombin in plasma thrombin • fibrinogen fibrin fibres • the red blood cells and platelets get entangled in the network of fibrin fibres to form the blood clot. 85 biology - x pathogens enter the body. the presence of toxins produced by the pathogens stimulates the white blood cells. the chemical substances produced by the white blood cells raises the body temperature. the rise in body temperature reduces the rate of multiplication of pathogens. increases the effect of phagocytosis. blood clotting helps to prevent bleeding and checks the entry of pathogens through wounds. as blood clots, the process of healing of wound also begins. healing of wounds healing of wound is a stage after inflammatory response and blood clotting. when a wound occurs new similar tissues are formed in place of the tissues damaged or lost by the wound. in such situations the wound scar does not remain. but, in cases when new similar tissues cannot be formed, the connective tissue heals the wound. in such situations, the wound scar remains. infections through the wound slow activated partial thromboplastin time ( aptt ) aptt is the test to detect the cause of excess bleeding or lack of clotting of blood. specific reagents are added to the blood sample and the time

taken for blood clotting is found out. the normal value of this test is 30 to 40 seconds. the quantity and action of the factors that help in blood clotting can be detected by this test. usually, when a wound occurs in human beings, bleeding lasts for 2 to 7 minutes and it clots within 8 to 15 minutes. down the healing process. a strong defense system accelerates the process of wound healing and reduces the chance of infection. fever, a defense mechanism the normal body temperature is 370 c ( 98. 60f ). fever is a condition when the body temperature rises above the normal level. is it a disease or a symptom? analyse the flow chart given and write your inferences in the science diary. nt - 885 - 2 - biology - 10 - ( e ) - vol - 2 86 biology - x you have understood that fever is a defense mechanism of the body. why do we take medicines during fever? read the note given below and formulate inferences. when infection becomes uncontrollable, the body temperature may rise tremendously. we take medicines to reduce the body temperature. but it is advisable to treat after diagnosing the exact reason. if the rise in body temperature persists for a long time, it may badly affect the internal organs including the brain. hence, if fever increases, it is necessary to seek medical assistance immediately.

you have understood some mechanisms that help to prevent and destroy the entry of germs. non - specific defense mechanism is a mechanism that protects us from all pathogens without considering their characteristic features. lymphocytes are the blood cells that specifically identify and destroy pathogens that enter the body by overcoming the non - specific defense mechanism of the body. lymphocytes – the warrior foreign bodies or pathogens that enter the body and stimulate the defense mechanism are called antigens. the defense mechanism that identifies the structure of each antigen and destroys it specifically is called specific defense. white blood cells known as lymphocytes are capable of destroying pathogens in this way. lymphocytes are formed in the bone marrow and are of two types. those that mature in the bone marrow are called b lymphocytes and those that mature in the thymus gland are called t lymphocytes. analyse figure 5. 3 and description, and prepare a note on the role of lymphocytes in specific defense mechanism. b - lymphocytes b - lymphocytes produce certain proteins that act against antigens. these are called antibodies. antibodies destroy the pathogens in three different ways. 1. destroy the bacteria by disintegrating their cell membrane.

2. neutralise the toxin of the antigens. 3. destroy the pathogens by stimulating other white blood cells. b - lymphocyte t - lymphocyte figure 5. 3 87 biology - x illustration 5. 7 blood & defense mechanisms raising body temperature. blood & defense mechanisms production of antibodies healing of wounds illustration 5. 8 lymphatic system lymph duct lymph node spleen immunoglobulin the defense chemicals produced by b lymphocytes as antibodies are known as immunoglobulins. this is a y shaped protein. there are specific sites for binding antigens at their ends. these sites help to recognise and destroy antigens specifically. there are five types of immunoglobulins such as iga, igd, ige, igg and igm. t - lymphocytes • stimulate other defense cells of the body. • destroy the cells affected by virus. • destroy cancer cells. complete illustration ( 5. 7 ) showing the defense mechanisms of blood, on the basis of the facts that you have already understood. lymph and defense you have already studied about the lymph. analyse illustration ( 5. 8 ) of the lymphatic system and the description given. discuss how lymph helps in defense mechanisms. the lymph, formed from the blood and reabsorbed into blood has a prominent role in defense mechanisms, like the blood itself.

lymph contains plenty of lymphocytes. they destroy the disease causing bacteria in lymph nodes and spleen. 88 biology - x when the body itself has defense mechanisms to prevent pathogens, why do we take vaccines? like breast milk, vaccinationtoo is the right of a new born. note the doubt of the child who observes the poster. what is vaccination? analyse the description given below and prepare notes in the science diary. defense mechanisms become slow when germs enter the body. this causes the spread and multiplication of germs. immunization is the artificial method to make the defense cells alert against the attack of pathogens. vaccines are the substances used for artificial immunization. any one of the components from alive or dead or neutralised germs, neutralised toxins or cellular parts of the pathogens will be the component of each vaccine. these act as antigens that stimulate the defense mechanism of the body. antibodies are formed in the body against them. these antibodies are retained in the body which in future protects the body from the pathogen responsible for the same disease. edward jenner edward jenner, an doctor started immunization in 1978. he observed that people affected by cowpox escaped from the attack of smallpox. he injected the pus taken from a

cowpox patient into the body of an 8 year old boy. the boy was affected by cowpox and recovered. after two months the pus taken from a smallpox patient was injected into the boy. he was not affected by smallpox. the immunization programmes got the name vaccination from the latin word ‘ vacca ’ meaning cow, in memory of the cowpox experiments of jenner. you have now understood the natural defense mechanisms of the body. is it possible to acquire immunity artificially? which are the methods? discuss. immunization 89 biology - x table 5. 2 indicators • significance of vaccination • components of vaccines • antigens and antibodies collect the national immunization schedule of preventive vaccines to be taken at different stages of childhood from birth. analyse it, collect more information and complete the table ( 5. 2 ). vaccine disease b. c. g. o. p. v. pentavalent m. m. r. t. t. prepare posters highlighting the importance of immunization and exhibit them in the classrooms. treatment – final defense what will happen if no treatment is taken when infected with diseases? treatment is the final defense, isn ’ t it? which are the different methods of treatment that we depend on? • ayurveda • sidda • unani • naturopathy • • ayurveda – india ’ s own ayurveda is a famous method of treatment

that has emerged from india. it is inevitable to live in harmony with nature to maintain an efficient and healthy body. in ayurveda, plant and animal products are used as medicines. 90 biology - x to understand the structure of internal organs using ultrasonic sound waves. to get three - dimensional visuals of internal organs with the help of computer, using x - rays. to get three - dimensional visuals of internal organs. equipment electro encephalo gram ( eeg ) electro cardio gram ( ecg ) ultra sound scanner c. t. scanner ( computed tomography scanner ) mri scanner ( magnetic resonance imaging scanner ) table 5. 3 to record electric waves in the brain. to record electric waves in the heart muscle. use figure 5. 4 diagnostic equipments observe figure 5. 4 and write the name and use of the diagnostic equipments in your science diary. today, besides these familiar equipments, most modern diagnostic tools are available in the field of medicine. examine table 5. 3 and prepare a note including the pictures and details of the use of modern diagnostic tools in your science diary. in various parts of the world, methods of treatment have evolved in accordance with the lifestyle of the people, their culture and available natural resources.

siddavaidya, panchakarma, unani, naturopathy, etc. are traditional treatment methods which have evolved like this. homeopathy is the method of treatment proposed by the german doctor, sammuel haniman. hippocrates paved the way for modern medicine. he began a treatment system that discarded superstitious beliefs and emphasized only on pathogens, diagnosis and medicines. prepare a journal by collecting more information related to various systems of medicine. modern medicine is far advanced in the field of treatment. scientific advancements in diagnosis and invention of new medicines became crucial in the development of modern medicine. 91 biology - x complete blood count ( cbc ) test details test result normal value haemoglobin 12. 2 gm 12 - 17 gm / 100 ml of / 100 ml of blood blood number of white 8, 200 / ml 5000 - 10000 blood cells of blood / ml of blood number of red 47 lakhs 45 lakhs to blood cells / ml of blood 60 lakhs / ml of blood number of 3. 2 lakhs 2. 5 lakhs to platelets / ml of blood 3. 5 lakhs / ml of blood report laboratory tests you know that laboratory tests help in the diagnosis of diseases. observe the report of a test showing the quantity of different factors in blood. collect information about different types of tests conducted in

the laboratory by enquiring about it to a lab technician and record it in the science diary. advancements in technology have developed various areas of specialization in modern medicine. identify the specializations in medicine and the related areas and complete table 5. 4. identify more areas and prepare a note on it. table 5. 4 specializations and areas specialization related area cardiology treatment of heart treatment of eye neurology cancer treatment e. n. t 92 biology - x kerala becomes a model again karsap ( kerala antimicrobial resistance strategic action plan ) submitted on october 2018, is another example for the kerala model. this action plan aims to fight against the resistance of microbes towards medicines. kerala is the first in the south east nations to launch this plan. in 2016, a form of tuberculosis, resistant to medicines affected five lakh people all over the world. who has already declared the resistive power of microorganisms as a global health crisis. when kerala strikes a model for such a programme initiated by who, it is undoubtedly a mark of pride for the people of the state. we should also be sensible to abstain from unhealthy habits like self treatment. it was alexander fleming who first discovered antibiotics

in 1928. he accidentally discovered that the fungus penicillium notatum has the ability to destroy bacteria. but it took several years to extract medicine from it. in treatment, along with diagnosis medicines also have great significance. medicines are either substances extracted from plants, animals or microorganisms or chemical substances synthesised in laboratories. antibiotics medicines that are extracted from microorganisms like bacteria, fungi, etc. and used to destroy bacteria are called antibiotics. they can be used externally and internally. though antibiotics are effective medicines, their regular use creates many side effects. some important side effects are listed below : • regular use develops immunity in pathogens against antibiotics. • destroys useful bacteria in the body. • reduces the quantity of some vitamins in the body. antifungal medicines, are used to destroy fungi and antiviral medicines are used to control viruses. is it advisable to use antibiotics without the recommendation by a doctor? discuss and write inferences in the science diary. 93 biology - x ab c giving artificial respiration arm supported by sling removing objects stuck in trachea. people in the age group 18 - 60 can donate blood. blood donation can be done once in three months.

blood donation causes no problem to the donor ’ s health. pregnant women and breast feeding mothers should not donate blood. persons with communicable diseases ( transmitted through blood ) should not donate blood. like diseases, accidents are also challenges to health. what can we do to overcome critical conditions during accidents till we get expert treatment? first aid can ' t we save the life of victims of accidents if we give them timely first aid? discuss. observe figures a, b and c and identify the instances in which the following type of first aid is given. notice board organise an awareness class regarding first aid by utilizing the facts you have studied and after collecting more information. during accidents heavy loss of blood occurs. how can this blood loss resolved? blood transfusion the transfer of blood from one person to another is called blood transfusion. what all things should be taken care of while transfusing blood? the instructions shown in a blood bank are given below. analyse each point and formulate inferences regarding precautions. 94 biology - x blood group a b ab o antigens antibodies a b a and b nil b a nil a and b table 5. 5 different types of blood groups can a patient receive blood from any person? why is blood group

testing done prior to blood transfusion? let us examine different types of blood groups in human beings and the basic concepts behind blood group determination. analyse table ( 5. 5 ) and the description based on the indicators and prepare notes in your science diary. the basis of blood grouping is the presence of antigen a and antigen b in red blood cells. the blood group of a person is named according to the antigen present in that person ’ s blood. in blood transfusion, certain antibodies present in the blood plasma are of special importance. in blood group a, antibody b and in group b, antibody a are present. in addition to antigens a and b, another antigen called d or rh factor is present in the cell membrane of red blood cells of certain persons. the blood groups in which rh factor is present are known as positive blood groups and those without rh factor are called negative blood groups. when a foreign antigen reaches one ’ s blood, it stimulates the defense mechanism. on receiving unmatching blood, the antigen present in the donor ' s blood and the antibody present in the recipient ' s blood will react with each other and form a blood clot. hence, everyone cannot receive blood from all blood groups. prepare posters on the greatness of donating blood and exhibit

them in your classroom. indicators • antigens and blood groups • antibodies and blood groups • rh factor 95 biology - x defense mechanism in plants bark well equipped resistant coat illustration 5. 10 complete illustration 5. 10 given below by including different defense mechanisms in plants. illustration 5. 9 defense mechanisms in plants wax covering, cuticle prevents the entry of germs through leaves. cell wall well equipped resistant coat. chemical substances such as lignin, cutin, suberin, etc. provide rigidity to the cell wall. the germs that have crossed the cell wall are prevented from entering through the cell membrane by callose, a polysaccharide formed in the cell wall. bark protects the inner cells from direct contact of pathogens. defense mechanisms in plants as in animals, plants also have mechanisms to prevent the entry of germs and to fight against those that have already entered. in plants, defense is made possible through structural and biochemical methods. analyse illustration ( 5. 9 ) and prepare notes on defense mechanisms in plants. 96 biology - x the healthy constitution of the body depends on the healthy state of the external environment. our body is well equipped with various defense mechanisms. similarly, it is our responsibility to

evolve defense mechanisms to protect our environment from factors causing diseases. 1. which among the following is not included in non - specific body defense? a. production of sebum b. action of hydrochloric acid in the stomach. c. action of b lymphocytes. d. action of lysozyme in saliva. 2. write the functions of blood cells in the defense mechanism of the body. 3. what is the basis of grouping blood into different types? everybody cannot receive blood of all blood groups. why? • conduct an interview with a doctor and collect information regarding the working of modern equipments used for diagnosing diseases and the significance of laboratory tests. prepare a wall poster and exhibit it in the classroom. • conduct a debate in the class on ' are antibiotics useful or harmful? ' • organise an awareness class regarding the significance of immunization. 97 biology - x observe the picture. you have understood that children acquire certain features from their parents. besides, don ' t the children show certain features different from their parents? find out such differences from the picture. children may inherit certain features either from their mother or father. features that are not seen in parents may also be found in children. 98 biology - x

the transmission of features of parents to offsprings is termed as heredity. the features seen in offsprings that are different from their parents are called variations. the branch of science that deals with heredity and variations is called genetics. emergence of genetics the inferences formulated by a scientist named gregor johann mendel, on the basis of hybridization experiments carried out in pea plants, led to the foundation of genetics. mendel is considered as the father of genetics. experiments of mendel observe illustration 6. 1 of the hybridization experiment conducted on the basis of two contrasting traits of the character height in pea plant. here the factors are illustrated using symbols. gregor johann mendel born in 1822 at brunn, austria ( modern czech republic ). he studied the inheritance of 7 pairs of contrasting traits in pea plants, scientifically known as pisum sativum. he formulated the laws of inheritance by analysing the inheritance of characters like height of plants, position of flower, shape of seed, colour of seed coat, colour of cotyledon, colour of fruit and shape of fruit. through his studies on inheritance, he explained that each character is controlled by a pair of factors, which he illustrated using symbols. in 1866 his findings were published,

but they failed to get due recognition. in 1884 he died. the significance of his findings was identified by research works conducted later. figure 6. 1 garden pea ( pisum sativum ) 99 biology - x indicators • the character of pea plants considered in this experiment. • the contrasting traits of this character. • the traits those were apparent and not apparent in the first generation. • difference in the factors of tall parent plant and the first generation plant. when plants that differ in a pair of contrasting traits are hybridized, only one trait is expressed while the other remains hidden in the offsprings of the first generation. the expressed trait is called dominant trait and the hidden trait is called recessive trait. genes and alleles gregor mendel assumed that the inheritance of characteristics from parents to offsprings is by certain factors transferred through gametes. it was discovered on the basis of later studies that the factors are the genes present in the chromosomes of the nucleus. a gene that controls a character has different forms. they are called alleles. generally, a gene has two alleles. for example, t and t are the different alleles of the gene that controls the character, height. the allele t determines the trait tallness and the allele t determines the

trait dwarfness. the allele that determines the dominant trait in the first generation is generally indicated by a capital letter and the allele that determines the recessive trait is indicated by a small letter. tall tt dwarf tt gametes illustration 6. 1 hybridization parental plants tall first generation ( f1 ) tt t t 100 biology - x self pollination of first generation plant tall.. tall tt xtt tt. tt. tt illustration 6. 2 self pollination of first generation plant second generation ( f2 ) gametes t t.. the fact that no intermediate plants were formed by the hybridization of tall and dwarf plants, and the factor responsible for dwarfness remaining hidden persuaded mendel to continue with his experiments. he self pollinated the first generation plant to understand what happened to the factor responsible for dwarfness in the first generation. complete illustration ( 6. 2 ) of this experiment, analyse it on the basis of indicators and write your inferences in the science diary. 101 biology - x indicators • characters of plants in the second generation. • plants in the second generation and their factors. • recessive trait in the first generation and the second generation. statistics in mendel ' s experiment

among the 1064 plants obtained in the second generation, 787 plants were tall and 277 plants were dwarf. the ratio of the result obtained is approximately 3 : 1. he continued his experiments based on contrasting traits of the other six different characters in pea plant. complete table 6. 1 given below and compare the ratios. why does the recessive trait in the first generation appear in the second generation? mendel came up with the assumption that during gamete formation the factors that determine a particular character segregate without getting mixed ; ie., half of the gametes formed from first generation plant tt, contain t and the other half contain t. the inferences formulated by mendel from such experiments are given below. • a character is controlled by the combination of two factors. • one trait is expressed ( dominant trait ) and the other trait remains hidden ( recessive trait ) in the offsprings of the first generation. • the traits that remain hidden in the first generation appear in the second generation. • the ratio of the dominant and the recessive traits in the second generation is 3 : 1. parental plants first generation second generation approximate ( self pollination ) ratio position of flowers axial × terminal 651 ( axial ), 207 ( terminal ) shape of seeds

round × wrinkled 882 ( round ), 299 ( wrinkled ) table 6. 1 hybridization experiment and ratio nt - 885 - 3 - biology - 10 - ( e ) - vol - 2 102 biology - x tr tr tr tr tr tr tr tr gametes illustration 6. 3 hybridization of two characters x ttrr ttrr tr gametes first generation ( f1 ). parental plants ttrr tr self pollination in first generation - ttrr x ttrr tall plant, round seed dwarf plant, wrinkled seed ttrr tall plant, round seed in his first experiment, mendel observed the inheritance of a single pair of contrasting traits. he observed the inheritance of two pairs of contrasting traits of the same plant in the next stage. observe the illustration showing the hybridization experiment conducted by mendel on two characters namely, height of the plant and shape of the seed. complete the illustration suitably. based on the indicators, analyse illustration 6. 3 and write down the inferences in the science diary. 103 biology - x indicators • factors present in the gametes produced by first generation. • characters in the plants of second generation. • characters different from parents that appeared in the second generation. through this experiment mendel could find the reason for the appearance of new combination of characters in offsprings that were not expressed in parents.

mendel explained that the appearance of variations in offsprings ( characters not present in previous generation ) is due to the independent assortment of each character. gregor mendel described those which are responsible for the inheritance of characters as factors. the real structure and peculiarities of these factors were not identified till the early 20th century. it was through further studies that the significance of dna ( deoxyribo nucleic acid ) molecule in the inheritance of characters was made clear. it was also found that the carriers of heredity which mendel described as ' factors ' were the genes present in dna. findings about the structure of dna in chromosomes became a great achievement in later genetic researches. molecular genetics is a fast developing area in the field of scientific research. dna ( deoxyribonucleic acid ) two scientists, james watson and francis crick, presented the double helical model of dna in 1953. this model fetched wide acceptance in the scientific world, and they were awarded the nobel prize in 1962. figure 6. 2 watson and crick mendel gains recognition mendel presented the most scientific inferences about the inheritance of characters. but, at that time the scientific world discarded his inferences. scientists named carl correns, erich von

tschermak and hugo de vries conducted similar experiments and observations independently. before publishing the results of their studies, they noticed the experiments and inferences of gregor mendel. then, they published their study results to substantiate scientifically the inferences of gregor mendel. thus in 1990, the inferences of mendel were established as mendel ’ s laws of inheritance. 104 biology - x as per the double helical model, dna molecule contains two strands. a structure with two long strands made up of sugar and phosphate, and rungs with nitrogen bases, was suggested. based on the indicators, analyse illustration 6. 4 and 6. 5 and the description given below. prepare a note on the structure of dna. dna molecule is made up of units called nucleotides. a nucleotide contains a sugar molecule, a phosphate molecule and a nitrogen base. rungs long strands cytosine adenine thymine guanine one strand of dna illustration 6. 4 structure of dna nitrogen base phosphate sugar molecule illustration 6. 5 nucleotide 105 biology - x illustration 6. 6 strands of dna dna contains deoxyribose sugar. nitrogen bases are molecules that contain nitrogen and are alkaline in nature. since dna has four kinds of nitrogen bases, namely adenine, thymine, guanine and cytosine, dna has four

kinds of nucleotides too. nitrogen bases, the building components of dna, are molecules with great specificity. in dna, the base adenine pairs only with thymine and guanine pairs only with cytosine. indicators • components of nucleotide. • nitrogen bases. • specificity maintained by nitrogen bases in pairing. the arrangement of nucleotides in a dna molecule is illustrated below. redraw this illustration ( 6. 6 ) in the science diary and complete its second strand. a humble attempt, yet a great achievement! rosalind franklin watson and crick happened to see the x - ray diffraction picture of dna, captured using x - rays by rosalind franklin, a researcher who was conducting research to identify the structure of dna. from this, they were able to disclose the molecular structure of dna, the molecule of life. based on this picture, watson and crick produced models using various things in their hostel room and ensured the possibility of double helical model of dna. 106 biology - x gene cell chromosome dna illustration 6. 7 nucleus number of strands type of sugar nitrogen bases dna rna table 6. 2 rna ( ribonucleic acid ) rna is another nucleic acid like dna. rna is also formed of nucleotides. ribose sugar is present in rna. in rna, the nitrogen

base uracil is seen instead of thymine. majority of rnas have only a single strand. compare the structure of dna and rna and complete table ( 6. 2 ) suitably. how do genes act? based on the indicators, analyse illustration 6. 8 and the description. write inferences in your science diary. how do genes act? the activity of particular proteins ( enzymes ) controls metabolic activities and is responsible for specific characteristics. genes contain information for protein synthesis. genes are particular segments of dna. observe illustration 6. 7 and get an understanding about the location of genes. 107 biology - x dna mrna reaches outside the nucleus. mrna reaches ribosome mrna forms from dna trna brings different kinds of amino acids to ribosome. based on the information in mrna, protein is synthesized by adding amino acids. illustration 6. 8 action of genes dna does not participate directly in protein synthesis. dna performs its activities with the help of rna. rna that carries information from dna reaches ribosome and controls protein synthesis. since this rna is the messenger of dna, it is called messenger rna or mrna. besides mrna, there are trna ( transfer rna ) that carry amino acids to the ribosomes and rrna ( ribosomal rna ) that are

seen associated with ribosomes. protein molecule is synthesized by the combined activities of all these molecules. indicators • different kinds of rnas. • role of mrna in protein synthesis. • activities that take place in the nucleus. • activities that take place in the cytoplasm. prepare a flow chart including the processes involved in protein synthesis in the science diary. 108 biology - x figure 6. 3 somatic chromosomes sex chromosomes chromosomes in humans each species has a definite number of chromosomes. analyse figure 6. 3 on the basis of indicators and the description. prepare a note on chromosomes in humans in your science diary. there are 46 chromosomes in human beings. of these, 44 are somatic chromosomes and two are sex chromosomes. a somatic chromosome pair contains two identical chromosomes. thus in human beings there are 22 pairs of somatic chromosomes. sex chromosomes are of two types. they are called x chromosome and y chromosome. females have two x chromosomes and males have one x chromosome and one y chromosome. ie., the genetic makeup of female is 44 + xx and that of male is 44 + xy. indicators • chromosome number • somatic chromosomes • sex chromosomes genetics of variation analyse the description given below and illustration ( 6. 9 ). based

on the indicators, write your inferences about the processes that cause variations in organisms. 109 biology - x chromosomes and diseases certain diseases have genetic causes. for example, it has been discovered that in humans, the disorder of gene in chromosome number 11 and the disorder of gene in chromosome number 14 is responsible for sickle cell anemia and alzheimer ’ s disease respectively. melanoma, the skin cancer, is caused by the disorder of gene in chromosome number 9. crossing over in chromosomes – a source of variation during the initial phase of meiosis, chromosomes pair and exchange their parts. this process is called crossing over of chromosomes. as a result of this, part of a dna crosses over to become the part of another dna. this causes a difference in the distribution of genes. when these chromosomes are transferred to the next generation, it causes the expression of new characters in offsprings. indicators • crossing over of chromosomes. • role of crossing over in causing variations. combination of allele during fertilization the chromosomes of parents reach the offsprings through gametes. when gametes undergo fusion, the combination of allele changes. this causes the expression of characteristics in offsprings that are

different from parents. thus, fertilization causes variations in the next generation. stage 1 stage 2 stage 3 illustration 6. 9 crossing over of chromosomes figure 6. 4 110 biology - x illustration 6. 10 determination of sex ( 44 + xx ) ( 44 + xy ) mutation a sudden heritable change in the genetic constitution of an organism is called mutation. this may occur due to defects in the duplication of dna, certain chemicals, radiations, etc. mutations bring about changes in genes which can be transmitted over generations and thus leading to variations in characters. mutations have great relevance in evolution. is the child male or female? what is the genetic mechanism that determines whether a child is male or female? observe illustration 6. 10. discuss with the help of indicators and write down inferences in the science diary. indicators • number of chromosomes in male and female. • chromosome difference in male and female. 111 biology - x what is the possibility for the birth of a male or a female child? discuss. the xy chromosomes of the father determine whether the child is male or female. child with xx sex chromosomes is female and one with xy sex chromosomes is male. difference in skin colour what may be the reason for the difference in the colour of skin in

people living in various parts of the world? melanin, a pigment protein imparts colour to the skin. the rise or fall in the production of melanin is due to difference in the function of alleles of genes responsible for skin colour. this is the reason for the colour difference of human skin. it is not racial difference which makes the skin colour dark or light. this is simply an adaptation to live under the sun. races among mankind are only cultural. biologically, all men are of the same race. studies in genetics become meaningful only when one attains an awareness to consider all men equal without any racial discrimination. illustration 6. 11 different colour of human skin 112 biology - x 1. the nitrogen base absent in rna. a. adenine b. thymine c. uracil d. cytosine 2. arrange the stages of protein synthesis in the form of a flow chart. • protein synthesized by adding amino acids. • mrna reaches ribosomes. • mrna is formed. • amino acids are carried to the ribosomes. 3. observe the hybridization experiment given below. a. illustrate this hybridization experiment using symbols. b. illustrate the second generation formed by the self pollination of first generation plant. 4. three processes that cause variations in new generations are

given. prepare a short note on each of the processes. • crossing over of chromosome • fertilization • mutation • prepare an edition including information on scientists who have made contributions in the progress of genetics. • prepare models of dna and rna using locally available materials and present them in science exhibition. plant with green coloured seed plant with yellow coloured seedx plant with green coloured seed did you notice saju ’ s doubt when he heard the doctor ’ s talk in the seminar conducted by the health club? how can bacteria produce insulin that can be used by humans? note down your assumption. how can the insulin produced by bacterium be used by humans? the insulin used for the treatment of diabetes is produced mainly from bacteria. 114 biology - x human cell cutting of insulin gene illustration 7. 1 production of insulin through genetic engineering joining insulin gene with plasmid active insulin is produced from this bacteria that multiply in the culture medium produce inactive insulin circular dna of the bacterium ( plasmid ) plasmid with ligated insulin gene is inserted in to bacterial cell human dna dna of the bacterium isolation of plasmid bacteria observe illustration 7. 1 on the various stages in the production

of bacteria that are capable of producing insulin. based on the indicators, analyse the illustration, validate your assumption and write down the inferences in the science diary. 115 biology - x indicators • change brought about in the genetic constitution of bacteria. • new trait formed in this bacterium. • ability of production of insulin by succeeding generations of this bacterium. genetic engineering science has progressed in such a way that it can produce organisms with desirable qualities, by bringing about changes in the genetic material. the use of microorganisms and biological processes for various human requisites is called biotechnology. from bc 4000 onwards organisms like yeast, a kind of fungus, were used to prepare food items like bread. the ability of fungi and bacteria to convert sugar into alcohol was utilised to make wine, appam and cake. these can be considered as traditional methods of biotechnology. genetic engineering is the modern form of biotechnology. today, we can produce things essential for humans by bringing about changes in the genetic material of organisms. you have already been familiarised with this idea when you analysed the method of production of insulin. genetic engineering is the

technology of controlling traits of organisms by bringing about desirable changes in the genetic constitution of organisms. the basis of this is the discovery of the fact that genes can be cut and joined. how are the very minute genes cut and joined? analyse the description given below on the basis of the indicators and prepare notes. enzymes are used to cut and join genes. the enzyme restriction endonuclease is used to cut genes. this enzyme is known as ‘ genetic scissors ’. the enzyme ligase is used for joining. this enzyme is called ‘ genetic glue ’. 116 biology - x t ^ md≥kniv ] cntim [ \ illustration 7. 2 scope of genetic engineering genetically modified animals and crops gene therapy forensic test how was the insulin producing gene of humans transferred into bacteria? a gene from one cell is transferred to another cell by using suitable vectors. vectors which contain ligated genes enter target cells. plasmids in bacteria are generally used as vectors. in this way, the new genes become a part of the genetic constitution of target cells. indicators • cutting of gene • ligation ( insertion ) of gene • vectors the progress in genetic engineering has influenced various sectors of life. identify this by observing illustration 7. 2 indicating some of the scope of genetic engineering.

gene therapy genetic engineering has made a great leap in the treatment of genetic diseases. gene therapy is a method of treatment in which the genes that are responsible for diseases are removed and normal functional genes are inserted in their place. this has triggered great hope in the control of genetic diseases. 117 biology - x how can the genes that are responsible for diseases be identified from among thousands of microscopic genes? what is your response to thara ’ s doubt? analyse the description given below on the basis of indicators. write down your inferences in the science diary. human genome project eventhough science has progressed a lot, we couldn ’ t control genetic diseases. the reason for this is that we could not identify the exact gene responsible for a specific trait and its location. in 1990, the human genome project was started as an attempt to solve this issue. as a result of experiments conducted in various laboratories around the world till 2003, the secrets of human genome were revealed. the technology known as gene mapping helped to identify the location of a gene in the dna responsible for a particular trait. the complete genetic material present in an organism is called its genome. in human dna, majority of genes,

except the genes that code for protein are non - functional. they are called junk genes. indicators • relevance of human genome project • benefit of gene mapping figure 7. 1 the logo of human genome project 118 biology - x human genome has about 24000 functional genes. major share of human dna includes junk genes. there is only 0. 2 percent difference in dna among humans. about 200 genes in human genome are identical to those in bacteria. protein required for treatment table 7. 1 disease / symptom interferons v iral diseases insulin diabetes endorphin pain somatotropin growth disorders did you understand the relevance of the human genome project? prepare a wall magazine using the information given below and collecting more data. exhibit the magazine in the classroom. genetically modified animals and crops many proteins that can be used for the treatment of diseases in humans are produced through genetic engineering. examine table 7. 1 given below and prepare notes on these proteins. genetic engineering has progressed a lot more from biotechnology. today, genetic modification in organisms can be implemented more effectively. this is made possible through the insertion of gene that code for desirable characters into the genetic constitution of an organism. 119 biology - x

editing of genetic constitution today, genetic engineering can edit the genes in the genetic constitution of organisms just as editing an essay. this most modern aspect of genetic engineering is called gene editing. crispr - cas 9 is the most effective genetic scissors used for this. this contains ' cas 9 ', an enzyme and a guide rna ( grna ). active researches on gene editing are being conducted worldwide. recently, china released the news on the birth of twins whose genes were edited. it is declared that these children have acquired resistance to hiv through gene editing. this technology has created an avenue to the endless scope of gene therapy. but it has also initiated many criticisms. worldwide protests are going on against researches which do not consider the possibilities of exploitations, dangerous effects and deterioration of values due to these experiments. one of the future promises of genetic engineering is pharm animals. genes responsible for the production of insulin and growth hormones required for humans are inserted into animals like cow, pig etc, transforming them into pharm animals. there are certain limitations in producing insulin using bacteria. the most important hurdle in this field is the culturing of bacteria. researches in this

field show that instead of this, medicines can be extracted from the blood or milk of genetically modified animals. genetic modification is implemented not only in animals but in plants also. today, insect resistant plants like bt brinjal, soyabean, cotton, maize etc are common. when genetic modification is carried out in organisms, it should be ensured that there are no harmful consequences to humans or nature. prepare a science edition on the new inventions in this field by collecting more information. 120 biology - x alec jeffreys did you notice the headline of the newspaper report? how are persons identified through dna testing? read the description given below. discuss it on the basis of the indicators and formulate inferences. write them down in the science diary. dna finger printing the technology of testing the arrangement of nucleotides is dna profiling. certain experiments conducted by a scientist named alec jeffreys in 1984 paved the way for dna testing. just like the difference in the fingerprint of each person, the arrangement of nucleotides in each person also differs. this discovery became the basis of dna testing. hence this technology is also called dna finger printing. lost child found after years : identified through dna testing dna samples collected from the

scene of crime suspect - 1 suspect - 2 suspect - 3 the arrangement of nucleotides among close relatives has many similarities. hence, dna finger printing is helpful to find out hereditary characteristics, to identify real parents in cases of parental dispute and to identify persons found after long periods of missing due to natural calamities or wars. dna of the skin, hair, nail, blood and other body fluids obtained from the place of murder, robbery etc., is compared with the dna of suspected persons. thus, the real culprit can be identified from among the suspected persons through this method. 121 biology - x bioweapons - a new challengebioweapons - a new challengebioweapons - a new challengebioweapons - a new challengebioweapons - a new challenge application of genetically modified pathogens and pathogens multiplied through biotechnology upon enemies is called biowar. this becomes a threat to the existence of human beings. genetic modificationgenetic modificationgenetic modificationgenetic modificationgenetic modification - violation of rights - violation of rights - violation of rights - violation of rights - violation of rights certain organizations argue that genetic modification is an intrusion upon the freedom of living beings and it is a violation of rights.

ttttthrhrhrhrhreaeaeaeaeat to indigt to indigt to indigt to indigt to indig enous venous venous venous venous v arietiesarietiesarietiesarietiesarieties it is criticized that genetically modified varieties cause harm to indigenous varieties and may cause health issues to humans. indicators • basis of the technology of dna finger printing. • scope of dna finger printing. we have familiarized ourselves with the endless scope of genetic engineering. collect more information regarding the scope of genetic engineering and exhibit in the science corner. through active researches and new discoveries, this branch is advancing day by day. but, like any other technology, genetic engineering has also been misused. observe the collage given below. is it right to misuse technologies that can pave the way to human progress? as such possibilities prevail, must we promote genetic engineering? organize a debate in the class on this topic. science and technology are the products of man ' s reasoning ability. we can justify this only if they are utilized for human benefit. we must use science and technology as means to overcome the challenges faced by human beings. 122 biology - x 1. which of the following is not a part of modern genetic engineering? a ) dna profiling b ) gene mapping

c ) dna finger printing d ) x - ray diffraction 2. gene therapy is an example of the boons of science for human existence. a ) what is gene therapy? b ) what was the discovery that led to gene therapy? c ) how does gene therapy become useful to human beings? 3. ‘ since genetic engineering has many harmful effects, it shouldn ’ t be promoted ’. do you agree with this statement? why? • prepare a slide presentation on the stages of insulin production through genetic engineering. • prepare a science edition by collecting pictures and news related to genetic engineering. did you notice the child ’ s doubt? how did the planets, including earth originate? how might have life originated? is there life on other planets? all such questions have always come under the purview of scientific enquiry. science has been able to put forth certain hypotheses on how earth and life on earth originated. the more predominant theory, on the origin of life on earth that was formed about 4500 million years ago, is the chemical evolution theory. the panspermia hypothesis is also a widely discussed one. if earth and mars originated in the same way, wouldn ' t there be organisms on mars like earth? 124 biology - x atmosphere of primitive earth • gases like hydrogen, nitrogen carbon dioxide, methane,

ammonia, water vapour, hydrogen sulphide etc. • no free oxygen. source of energy • thunder and lightning. • ultraviolet radiations. • volcanic eruptions. simple organic molecules • amino acids • monosaccharide • nitrogen bases • fatty acids etc complex organic molecules • protein • polysaccharide • nucleotides • lipids etc. primitive cell nucleic acids, lipid layer illustration 81. chemical evolution condensation of water vapour present in the atmosphere and the resulting incessant rain led to the formation of oceans. the panspermia argues that life originated in some other planet in the universe and accidentally reached the earth. the organic substances obtained from the meteors that fell on earth support this. the hypothesis that evolved into the theory of chemical evolution is that life originated as a result of the changes that occurred in the chemical substances in seawater, under specific conditions in primitive earth. this theory is generally accepted by the scientific world due to its experimental evidences. the russian scientist a. i. oparin ( 1924 ) and the british scientist j. b. s. haldane ( 1929 ) are the proponents of this theory. analyse illustration 8. 1 and prepare a note on the theory of chemical evolution in your science diary. a. i. oparin j. b. s. haldane indicators

• atmosphere of primitive earth – peculiarities. • sources of energy. • formation of ocean. • chemical reactions that led to the formation of cell. 125 biology - x electric energy condenser water amino acids get sedimentedheat energy illustration 8. 2 urey – miller experiment methane, ammonia, water vapour glass flask the scientific basis of this hypothesis regarding the origin of life was later proved through various experiments. urey – miller experiment urey and miller conducted their experiment by artificially recreating the atmosphere of primitive earth that contained methane, ammonia, hydrogen and water vapour. analyse illustration 8. 2 and the description, on the basis of the given indicators and prepare a note in your science diary. in the place of natural energy sources like thunder and lightning in the atmosphere of primitive earth, high voltage electricity was passed through the gaseous mixture in the glass flask. then, this gaseous mixture was cooled with the help of a condenser. the sediment substances were separated and when observed, organic molecules such as amino acids, were found. later many scientists designed similar experiments and more organic compounds were synthesized. this finally gave more acceptance to the oparin – haldane hypothesis. stanley miller

harold urey indicators • atmosphere of primitive earth and chemical components in the glass flask. • organic molecules formed after the chemical reaction. in the oceans of primitive earth, organic compounds were formed due to chemical evolution that continued for millions of years. on the basis of the given indicators analyse the major events related to the origin of life as illustrated in the geological time scale 8. 3. prepare a note in the science diary. 126 biology - x illustration 8. 3 geological time scale millions of years ago prokaryotes primitive cell eukaryotes colony of eukaryotes multicellular organisms 2 1 3 4 5 3800 origin of life on earth 3500 origin of prokaryotes 1500 origin of eukaryotes 1000 origin of multicellular organisms indicators • primitive cell • origin of prokaryotes • origin of eukaryotes • appearance of multicellular organisms researches all over the world are still striving to unravel the mysteries related to the origin of life on earth. presence of life on other planets is also a main area of research. life emerged as a result of the accidental combining of inorganic molecules. 127 biology - x many space explorations still undertake the quest to find out whether similar phenomena occur anywhere else among the millions of celestial orbs.

the method of science is formulation of inferences on the basis of evidences obtained through experiments and observations. science emerged along with the origin of human beings. so direct evidences are not available for explaining the origin of life and the process of evolution that began a long time before the origin of man. hence, scientific concepts in these two areas undergo continuous changes. this is not a limitation of science. science is unprejudiced and accepts all new knowledge formulated on the basis of derived evidences and rejects or revises the existing ones. this aspect of science makes it credible. evolution - through theories many scientists have attempted to explain the history of evolution from primitive cells to the biodiversity that exists today. the first attempt among them was by jean baptist lamarck, a french biologist. lamarckism the characters developed during the life time of organisms are called acquired characters. lamarck explained that these characters accumulate through generations and lead to the formation of new species. according to lamarck giraffes had short necks in the beginning. when they faced food scarcity, they stretched their necks to reach out to tall trees. thus giraffes with long necks

emerged through generations ( figure 8. 1 ). but this argument was not accepted by the scientific world as these acquired characters are not inheritable. lamarck 128 biology - x charles darwin figure 8. 1 darwinism a logical scientific theory on evolution was first put forward by charles robert darwin, an english naturalist. darwin adopted a scientific method for formulating inferences through observation and data analysis. this scientific credibility paved way for the larger acceptance of darwin ’ s theory of evolution. darwin ’ s voyage darwin ’ s voyage to the galapagos islands in the ship hms beagle was a turning point both in his life and in the history of the theory of evolution. charles darwin formulated his theory of evolution on the basis of the studies conducted on organisms in galapagos islands. darwin was only 22 years old when he joined a group appointed by the british government to construct maps of coastal areas. by the time he returned to britain after 7 years, he had collected necessary evidences for his theory of evolution. after further follow up enquiries, observations and studies, he presented his theory in the renowned text origin of species by means of natural selection, at the age of fifty. this theory that broke off many

existing beliefs got great acceptance in the scientific world. finches were one among the organisms observed and closely studied by darwin in the galapagos islands. the differences in the beaks of these finches attracted darwin. on the basis of indicators, analyse illustration 8. 4 and the description given below. write down your inferences in the science diary. 129 biology - x illustration 8. 4 galapagos finches tree finch medium sized tree finch woodpecker finch insectivorous finch cactus eating finch small ground finch large ground finch ancestor finch insectivorous finches have small beaks and those that feed on cactus plants have long and sharp beaks. there were also woodpecker finches that used sharp beaks to pick small twigs for feeding on worms from the holes in tree trunks. the ground finches that feed on seeds with large beaks were also present. indicators • which peculiarity of the finches attracted darwin? • how do these peculiarities help finches in their survival? it is clear that the finches darwin observed had beaks adapted to their feeding habits. another idea that influenced darwin ’ s speculations about the diversity of the beaks of finches was that of thomas robert malthus, an economist. rate of food production is not proportionate to the growth of

human population. thomas robert malthus pointed out that scarcity of food led to diseases, starvation and struggle for existence. analyse illustration 8. 5 and the description given below. identify the main concepts of the ‘ theory of natural selection ’ put forward by darwin by incorporating malthusian ideas. based on the indicators, prepare a note in your science diary. robert malthus 130 biology - x the theory of natural selection every species produces more number of offsprings than that can survive on earth. they compete with one another for food, space and mates. the competition becomes hard when the number of organisms is more and the availability of resources is less. many variations are visible in organisms. these variations may be favourable or unfavourable. those with favourable variations survive in the struggle for existence. others are eliminated. variations that are inherited through generations and repeated differently help to form species that are different from their ancestors. this type of selection, done by nature, leads to the diversity of species that we see around us. this is the explanation of darwin ’ s theory which is known as the theory of natural selection. indicators • circumstance that leads to severe competition among organisms.

• variations and natural selection. • origin of new species. illustration 8. 5 theory of natural selection organisms with variations over production struggle for existence those with no favourable variations those with favourable variations destroyed natural selection survive favourable variations are transferred to the next generation. accumulation of variations inherited through generations. origin of new species 131 biology - x though darwin identified that continuous variations occurred in organisms, he could not explain the reasons for these variations. during his period there was no idea regarding genes, chromosomes etc. darwinism was revised in the light of new information from the fields of genetics, cytology, geology and paleontology. this modified version of darwinism is known as neo darwinism. evidences of evolution there are many evidences to support the evolution of new species. paleontology, comparative morphology, physiology and modern molecular biology provide evidences to validate evolution. fossils – evidence of evolution fossils are the remnants of primitive organisms. they are evidences that explain the history of life on earth. fossils may be the body, body parts or imprints of organisms. the

age of fossils can be calculated scientifically. they are categorised on the basis of geological time scale and their peculiarities are studied. the oldest known fossils dating from about 3. 5 billion years ago are of prokaryotes. fossils from different layers of rocks indicate the evolution of eukaryotes from prokaryotes. cell biology and molecular biology make fossil evidences more scientific. what are the inferences you can arrive at from such studies? hugo devries mutation theory you know that changes in genes are one of the reasons for variations in organisms. sudden changes that occur in genes are called mutations. mutation theory explains that new species are formed by the inheritance of such changes. this theory was formulated by a dutch scientist, hugo devries. later it was explained that mutations that cause variations lead to the evolution of species. 132 biology - x illustration 8. 7 comparative morphological studies analyse illustration 8. 6 and prepare notes. comparative morphological studies observe illustration 8. 7 and compare the structure of forelimbs in lizard, bat, whale etc. recently formed fossils have complex structure. primitive fossils have simple structure. certain fossils are connecting links between different species.

illustration 8. 6 evidences provided by fossils the forelimbs of these organisms differ in their external appearance. are they different in their anatomy too? these forelimbs are made up of blood vessels, nerves, muscles and bones. differences in their external appearances are their adaptations to live in their own habitats. organs that are similar in structure and perform different functions are called homologous organs. 133 biology - x enzymes control chemical reactions. energy is stored in atp molecules. genes determine hereditary traits. carbohydrates, proteins and fats are the basic substances. bacteria human being illustration 8. 8 biochemistry and physiology do such anatomical resemblances justify the inference that all organisms evolved from a common ancestor? discuss and write down your inferences in the science diary. biochemistry and physiology how different are microbes, plants and animals in their external appearance! but there are close resemblances in their cell structure and physiology. observe illustration 8. 8. what proof of evolution do you get from these facts? isn ’ t it clear from these facts that different species that exist today have a common ancestor? discuss. molecular biology through a comparative study of protein molecules in different

species, the evolutionary relationship among organisms can be identified. mutations may occur in the genes that determine the amino acid sequence in protein molecules. this causes changes in amino acids. the amino acids in the chain of haemoglobin in man has been compared to the amino acids in the chain of other organisms. available data are listed below. based on the indicators, analyse table 8. 1 and write your inferences in the science diary. 134 biology - x this is an effective method to illustrate the branching pattern of evolution from a common ancestor. these kinds of molecular studies help to find out the evolutionary relationship of different species of organisms. indicators • which organism is the farthest from humans from the evolutionary point of view? why? • which organism is the closest to man from the evolutionary point of view? what is the reason for this? evolution of human beings an evolutionary tree relating to certain organisms including humans is given below. organisms show many similarities as they have evolved from a common ancestor. analyse illustrations 8. 9 and description on the main branches in the evolution of human beings. prepare a note in your science diary. humans, chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, gibbon and

monkeys are included in the category anthropoidea. this is further classified into cercopithecoidea and hominoidea. difference from the amino acids in the chain of haemoglobin in man no change difference of one amino acid difference of 31 amino acids. table 8. 1 organism chimpanzee gorilla rat 135 biology - x manchimpanzeegorillaorangutangibbonmonkey illustration 8. 9 evolution of human beings cercopithecoidea small brain, long tailed. anthropoidea hominoidea developed brain, freely movable hands indicators • which organism is the closest to humans in specific characters? • how anthropoidea, cercopithecoidea and hominoidea are related to each other? • what are the characteristics of the organisms which belong to the group hominoidea? • “ man evolved from monkeys ”. how would you respond to this statement? illustration 8. 10 depicts the evolutionary history of modern man. formulate inference on how biological changes helped human being to emerge in the present form, by analysing the illustration. 136 biology - x illustration 8. 10 main stages in the history of human evolution ardipithecus ramidus • the most primitive member of the human race. • fossils were discovered from africa. australopithecus afarensis • slender body. • fossils were discovered from africa.

homo habilis • made weapons from stones and bone pieces. • fossils were discovered from africa. homo erectus • thick chin and large teeth, had the ability to stand erect. • fossils were discovered from africa and asia. homo neanderthalensis • contemporary to modern man. • fossils were discovered from europe and asia homo sapiens • modern man. • first fossils were discovered from france. 137 biology - x what are the features of modern man that differentiate him from other organisms included in the historical path of human evolution? • • • does the interference of human beings have a negative impact on the existence of organisms and nature itself? biodiversity at global level has increased much recently than ever before. but this biodiversity is on a dangerous decline due to the interference of human beings. it is recorded in the evolutionary history that there occurred five mass extinctions till now and biodiversity got reestablished rapidly afterwards. would the reckless interference of intelligent human beings destroy the continuity of life on earth? discuss. today we are aware of the challenges raised by climatic changes brought about by human interventions and the extinction of organisms. individuals and organizations are

actively participating in programmes for the conservation of nature. this reinforces the fact that human life is possible on earth only with the preservation of other diverse ecosystems. human beings are capable of foreseeing far - reaching consequences and taking necessary precautions in this regard. this leaves us with hopes for future life on earth. 138 biology - x 1. which concept is put forward by the theory of natural selection? a. origin of life b. origin of species c. origin of eukaryotes d. chemical evolution of life 2. list the main concepts that indicate how the biodiversity seen today has developed from prokaryotes. 3. how does the interference of human beings with nature influence the process of evolution? how does this affect the existence of other organisms? 4. what are the evidences that substantiate the theories of evolution? identify and explain them. • prepare and exhibit a model of the experimental set up constructed by urey – miller to scientifically prove the theory of chemical evolution. • prepare a chart illustrating the evolutionary tree of man. • collect data on scientists who contributed scientific evidences for chemical evolution and prepare an edition. 139 biology - x notes 140 biology - x notes 141 biology - x notes 142 biology - x notes 143

biology - x notes constitution of india part iv a fundamental duties of citizens article 51 a fundamental duties - it shall be the duty of every citizen of india : ( a ) to abide by the constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the national flag and the national anthem ; ( b ) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom ; ( c ) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of india ; ( d ) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so ; ( e ) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of india transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities ; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women ; ( f ) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture ; ( g ) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers, wild life and to have compassion for living creatures ; ( h ) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform ; ( i ) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence ; ( j ) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievements ;

( k ) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between age of six and fourteen years. forests have a great role in conserving the health of the environment in which we live. forests are decisive in many respects. source of the water we drink and the air we breathe, balancing atmospheric temperature, determining weather, managing agriculture, source of our food etc., are some of those areas. wild animals inhabit forests. each animal has a function to perform in the environment in which it lives. thus wild animals have a vital role in aspects like pollination of plants, dispersal of seeds, sustenance of forests etc. it is our duty to protect and preserve forests, lakes, rivers, wild animals etc, which are all part of our nature. also, article 51 ( g ) of our constitution reminds every citizen of india to have a compassion for living creatures. activities taken up for the conservation of forests and wild life by the forest department : • establishing forestry clubs in schools, for spreading knowledge about forests. • establishing eco - tourism centres as a part of encouraging eco - friendly tourism. • conducting nature study camps as a part of forest and wild life education. • making public places green.

• providing financial aid to conserve ' kaavu '. • turtle conservation project. • instituting ' vanamitra award ' for promoting creative contributions in the field of green projects. • instituting ' prakritimitra award ' for conserving habitats outside forests and biodiversity. • conducting the ' citizen conservator programme ' for ensuring the role of public in forest conservation. toll free number of forest department : 18004254733 its high time we protected nature and natural resources ….!

contentscontentscontentscontentscontents 01. revolutions that influenced the world 09 - 30 02. world in the twentieth century 31 - 54 03. public administration 55 - 68 04. british exploitation and resistance 69 - 86 05. culture and nationalism 87 - 104 06. struggle and freedom 105 - 120 about the book the part i of social science textbook consists of eleven chapters related to history, political science, and sociology. among them, seven chapters deal with history. the first two chapters are related to world history and the subsequent four chapters discuss themes from indian history. one chapter is

related to kerala history. incorporating maximum historical sources, these chapters are designed widely, utilizing the scope of thematic presentation. they are the extension of lessons presented in the seventh standard. the entire chapters have been planned ensuring continuity and extension of the contents discussed in the previous classes. the seventh standard textbook emphasises on chronological presentation of personalities, movements, facts, etc. on the other hand the textbook for standard x introduces the historical process by giving prominence to the analysis of concepts rather than

presenting mere facts and events. the ideals like liberty, democracy, secularism, and nationalism - inevitable for the human life in modern era - were evolved as part of freedom struggles and revolutions that took place in various continents. the development and progress of such modern ideologies are introduced and analysed in the first chapter, ' the revolutions that influenced the world '. the major events in the world during the twentieth century and its impact are discussed in the second chapter, ' world in the twentieth century '. it focuses on the impacts

rather than the mere description of facts and events. wars evolve from human mind, hence naturally the resistance against war should also come from within. this is the underlying theme of this chapter. this is followed by chapters on history of modern india, dealing with the nationalist movement as a reaction to the imperialistic exploitation of the british. ' british exploitation and resistance ' discusses how the british exploitation led different sections of people to develop anti - colonial sentiment and economic nationalism.

the impact of nationalism on indian cultural life is described in the chapter, ' culture and nationalism '. the chapter, ' struggle and freedom ' discusses how the national movement, initially limited to the upper class and the educated, became a mass movement. the challenges faced by the post - independent india and its journey towards progress are discussed in the chapter, ' india after independence '. the subject matter of ‘ kerala towards modernity ’ is various socio - political movements that led to the formation of kerala, and its march towards modernity.

as a part of political science, the features and structure of public administrative system, and the administrative reforms in india are introduced in the chapter, ' public administration '. the chapter, ' the state and political science ' describes the elements of a state, and the rights and duties of a citizen. it points towards the relevance of political science as a discipline. the chapter, ' civic consciousness ', discusses the significance of civic consciousness in a democratic society. the last chapter ' sociology : what?

why? ' discusses the importance of sociology as a discipline and introduces various sociological methods to study social phenomena. the themes, learning activities, reflective questions, questions for self evaluation, and extended activities that facilitate the knowledge construction process are included in all the chapters. we hope you would be able to extend the scope of the contents in this textbook by proper exploration of these avenues and make construction of knowledge more effective and activity - based. a few lines from the poem ' oru udbodhanam ' by

kumaranasan can be seen on the plate in the picture. these lines remind us of the importance of freedom in human life. think about the freedom that we enjoy in day - to - day life. did the people everywhere enjoy freedom like this? in several places the common people did not have as much freedom as we have today. the people who were deprived of freedom had to fight for it. some adopted peaceful means, whereas others preferred armed rebellion. all these struggles tried to change the system that denied freedom and rights and to establish a new one. therefore they are known as revolutions.

the major factor that stimulated earlier revolutions was the renaissance. do you remember the renaissance discussed in the previous classes? renaissance made significant changes in human thought, views, and life. let us examine them. humanism scientific temper kumaranasan memorial - kayikkara revolutions that influenced the world10 no taxation withoutno taxation withoutno taxation withoutno taxation withoutno taxation without representationrepresentationrepresentationrepresentationrepresentation these noval ideas motivated people to question irrational beliefs and traditions.

the progress in the field of science brought about by the renaissance gave birth to ' enlightenment ' in the eighteenth century. thinkers of this movement propagated the ideas like freedom, democracy, equality, and nationalism. it encouraged the people in different parts of the world to protest against the autocratic system prevailing then. these protests developed into revolutions in many places. let ' s discuss some of these revolutions and their impact. enlightenment it was the scientific invention in europe that moulded enlightenment, an intellectual and cultural movement.

the thinkers of this movement gave importance to reasoning and opined that society is always progressing. the american war of independence this was a slogan that thundered along different parts of north america in the second half of the 18th century. what did people demand through this slogan, framed by james ottis? representation in government this slogan was raised by the people of america as part of a powerful agitation. let us discuss the circumstances that led to the agitation. from the sixteenth century onwards the europeans began to migrate to north

america. the major aim of the migration was to exploit the resources. by the eighteenth century, england had established thirteen colonies in the eastern coast of north america. can you locate them in the map? the thirteen colonies in north america observe the map and list out the thirteen british colonies in north america. revolutions that influenced the world x 11 the british treated the american colonies as centers for collecting raw materials for their industry and as market for selling their products. this policy implemented by the british merchants with

the help of their motherland in the american colonies, is known as mercantilism. as part of mercantilism, several laws were implemented in the british colonies. let ' s discuss a few of them. migration to america christopher columbus, a sailor of the spanish government, reached north america in 1492. he called the indigenous people as ' indians '. he thought that the place he reached was india. later, they were known as the ' red indians '. the earlier colonies in america were established by a group of people, who exiled to america from the religious

persecution of the king of england in the seventeenth century on a ship called ' mayflower '. they were known as the ' pilgrim fathers '. with the increase in european migration, the red indians were displaced to the interiors. the europeans seized their land and flock of sheep. mercantilist laws the goods to and from the colonies must be carried only in british ships or ships built in the british colonies. products of the colonies like sugar, wool, cotton, tobacco, etc. could only be exported to england. colonies must provide food and quarters for the british troops which were

maintained in the colonies. british stamp must be affixed on all the legal documents, newspapers, pamphlets, license, etc. import tax must be paid for the import of tea, glass, paper, etc. revolutions that influenced the world12 " the mercantilist laws turned the american colonial people against their mother land ' ' assess the statement john locke everyone has some fundamental rights. no government has the right to suspend them. thomas paine there is something absurd, in supposing a continent ( north america ) be perpetually governed by a foreign power ( england ). the entire continent assembles

the delegates of all the colonies except georgia met at philadelphia in 1774 to protest against the policies and rules imposed by england. it is known as the first continental congress. subsequently, people of the colonies submitted a petition to the king of england. they demanded the revocation of the regulations enforced on industry and commerce and not to impose tax without the approval of the people. but the king sent a military force to suppress the people. this led to the war between england and the colonies. the second continental continental congress

the ideologies of some thinkers also stimulated the people of the colonies to fight against the exploitative laws of the british. let ' s familiarize with those thinkers and their ideologies. boston tea party the high tax levied by the british government on tea fired up strong protest in america. on 16 december 1773, a group of people disguised as the red indians, boarded the ships at night in the boston harbour and threw 342 chests of tea into the sea. this protest is known as the boston tea party. revolutions that influenced the world x 13 congress held at philadelphia in 1775 elected

george washington as the commander - in - chief of the continental army. during this time, through the pamphlet titled ' common sense ', thomas paine declared that it was wise for the americans to break the ties with britain. the american continental congress issued the famous declaration of independence on 4 july 1776. the declaration was prepared by thomas jefferson, and benjamin franklin. an extract from it is given. regarding human rights and freedom, what all can you find in this declaration? all are equal everyone has certain rights the war between england and the colonies

in north america that began with the declaration of freedom, ended in 1781. according to the treaty of paris in 1783, england ratified the freedom of thirteen colonies. the constitution convention held at philadelphia under the leadership of james madison, framed the american constitution. george washington became the first president of the united states of america, formed in accordance with the new constitution. declaration of american independence prepare a flow chart illustrating the various events that led to the formation of the united states of america. george washington

the american war of independence transformed the system existed there. it greatly influenced the later history of the world in different ways. let ' s see them. revolutions that influenced the world14 gave direction and motivation to the later freedom struggles and revolutions all over the world put forward the concept of republican form of government prepared the first written constitution. contributed to the concept of federal system that ensured freedom and authority of states in the union. prepare a note on the ideologies of the american war of independence that

are reflected in the constitution of india. the statements made by the rulers of france in the seventeenth and the eighteenth centuries and the picture of versailles palace, which was the centre of their power, are given. what all information do you gather from these statements on the system of rule that existed in france then? autocratic rule rulers were squanders what could be the plight of the people under such rule? the following lines point towards it. " in france, nine - tenths of the population died of hunger and one tenth of indigestion ".

it is clear from this that while the majority in france lived in misery a minority, including the rulers, led a life of luxury and extravagance. this situation was the result of the social and economic inequality that existed in france. the french society was divided into three strata and they were known as the estates. you can find more information on the french society from the chart given. the french revolution the palace of versailles " after me, the deluge. " louis xv " i am the state. " god has given absolute power to the king over his subjects and only god has the authority

to question him. louis xiv " if they can ' t eat bread, let them eat cake. " mary antoinette prepare a digital timeline on the various events related to the american war of independence revolutions that influenced the world x 15 analyze the chart and give answers for the following questions. which estate enjoyed higher social privilege and status, and led a luxurious life in france? to which estate did the majority of the people belong? which estate exploited the common people and accumulated wealth? which estate desired a change in the system? why? ideologies inspire

various thinkers and streams of thought in france played an important role in making the people aware of the inequalities and exploitation. let ' s learn more about these thinkers and their ideologies. revolutions that influenced the world16 the third estate takes the lead the luxurious life and squander of the bourbon kings, clergy and lords and the frequent wars they waged, along with the frequent spells of drought and crop failure, brought france to the brink of bankruptcy. the financial and military assistance given to american colonies in the american war of indepen - dence also

aggravated the financial crisis in france. to levy new taxes upon commoners, louis xvi summoned the states general, the legislative assembly of the representatives from all the three estates, in 1789. similar to the french society, the states general also had three estates. traditionally, each estate would vote as a group and had one vote. as a result, the nobility and the clergy could always overrule the third estate. the first two estates argued for estate - wise single voting system, while the third estate ( the commons ) demanded individual vote for each member of all the three estates.

the states general montesquieu suggested division of powers of the government into legislature, executive, and judiciary encouraged democracy and the republic. spelled out the importance of freedom with the statement, ' man is born free, but everywhere he is in chains '. declared that the people are the sovereign. rousseau ridiculed the exploitation of clergy. promoted rational thinking, ideals of equality and humanism. voltaire revolutions that influenced the world x 17 examine the membership strength of each estate given in the table below.

relate it with their demand regarding the voting system. states generalstates generalstates generalstates generalstates general the first estate 285 the second estate 308 the third estate 621 while the arguments went on, the members of the third estate declared themselves as the national assembly of france. they assembled in the tennis court nearby, and swore not to leave until they had framed a constitution of france. this event is known as the ' tennis court oath '. let ' s discuss the subsequent events with the help of the chart below.

october, 1789 thousands of women marched from paris to the palace of versailles with the slogan ' give us bread '. september, 1792 the national convention, formed as per the new constitution, proclaimed france as a republic. 14 july 1789 revolutionaries stormed with the slogan ' liberty, equality, and fraternity ', demolished the bastille prison, the symbol of bourbon monarchy. this event is considered as the commencement of the french revolution. 12 august 1789 the national assembly passed the declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen. reign of terror

in july, 1793 a committee of public safety was constituted to control the internal affairs of france. robespierre led the committee in which leaders like mirabeau, danton, etc. were members. using guillotine they did mass executions of suspected enemies of the revolution. a lot of nobles and clergy, including louis xvi and his wife marie antoinette, were killed. at last robespierre was also executed. the reign lasted until july 1794 and is known as the reign of terror. guillotine revolutions that influenced the world18 declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen

from france to other nations french revolution and india the french revolution influenced tipu sultan, the ruler of mysore. he treated the alliance with the french as a strategy to fight against the british rule in india. he adopted the name citizen tipu and planted the tree of liberty at sreerangapattanam, his capital. he also took membership in the french club, jacobin. analyze the events related to the french revolution and evaluate how far it could attain the goals of liberty, equality and fraternity. a part of the declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen passed by the french

national assembly is given below. discuss how far the aims and slogans of the french revolution are reflected in it. influence of french revolution when france sneezes, when france sneezes, when france sneezes, when france sneezes, when france sneezes, the rest of europe catches coldthe rest of europe catches coldthe rest of europe catches coldthe rest of europe catches coldthe rest of europe catches cold this is the remark made by metternich, the austrian chancellor, on the impact of the french revolution. why did he remark so? observe the chart below that describes the impact of the french

revolution. revolutions that influenced the world x 19 analyze the aims and influence of the french revolution. napoleon and the french revolution the french who revolted for noble aims had to survive under the autocratic rule of napoleon bonaparte for a short period. napoleon played a crucial role in defeating the european alliance which was formed under the leadership of britain against france in the post - revolution period. he seized the power in france in 1799. though an autocrat, he instituted several reforms in france. those reforms were stimulated by the ideas and aims of the french

revolution. let ' s take a took at them. rousseau and the declaration of the human rights it is the ideology of rousseau that is reflected in the declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen prepared by the french national assembly. ' social contract ' is the famous work of rousseau. according to him the government is the outcome of the contract between the ruler and the ruled. a farmers were made the owners of land exercised state ' s control over the clergy established bank of france to centralize finance constructed several roads for transportation prepared a new code of

law by codifying the existing laws napoleon formed ' sinking fund ' with the aim to avoid public debt in france, nationalism strengthened during the reign of napoleon. one by one, he invaded the other european countries. the european countries feared that the reforms of napoleon would spread all over europe. they organized themselves under the leadership of england. it was the ideals of the french revolution and not napoleon that they were afraid of. napoleon was defeated by the european alliance in the battle of waterloo and lost his power in 1815.

revolutions that influenced the world20 rise of the middle class end of feudalism nationalism the concepts of policies and reforms of french revolution napoleon " this was " this was " this was " this was " this was the dwelling, this is the place : the dwelling, this is the place : the dwelling, this is the place : the dwelling, this is the place : the dwelling, this is the place : here the broad grains of maize rose up here the broad grains of maize rose up here the broad grains of maize rose up here the broad grains of maize rose up here the broad grains of maize rose up

and fell again like red hail. and fell again like red hail. and fell again like red hail. and fell again like red hail. and fell again like red hail. here gold thread came off the vicunahere gold thread came off the vicunahere gold thread came off the vicunahere gold thread came off the vicunahere gold thread came off the vicuna to clothe lovers, tombs, and mothers, to clothe lovers, tombs, and mothers, to clothe lovers, tombs, and mothers, to clothe lovers, tombs, and mothers, to clothe lovers, tombs, and mothers,

king and prayers and warriorsking and prayers and warriorsking and prayers and warriorsking and prayers and warriorsking and prayers and warriors give me back the slave you buried! " give me back the slave you buried! " give me back the slave you buried! " give me back the slave you buried! " give me back the slave you buried! " pablo neruda ' heights of macchu picchu ' the latin american revolution pablo nerudha the latin american poet portraits the sights of macchu picchu, one of the centres of ancient south american civilizations. what all can you find out from this poem. abundance of resources

cultivated maize reared sheaps acquired wealth through trade the spanish and portuguese colonized the latin america to exploit this economic richness. let us examine how the colonial rule affected the life of natives of latin america. examine the reforms and policies of napoleon and identify the ideologies of french revolution reflected in them. complete the following table based on your conclusions. revolutions that influenced the world x 21 the spanish and portuguese propagated their language, religions and customs. they build houses and churches in spanish style, several

schools were established for imparting spanish system of education. the spanish farming methods and crops were introduced. new diseases spread from europeans to the latin americans. racial discrimination was enforced towards the natives in all walks of life. they looted the resources and wealth of the latin american people. enslaved the natives to work. the revolutions lead by jose de sannartin, fransico miranda and simon boliver etc., lead latin american countries to be independent. macchu picchu - peru

" we are workers, people by whose labour all things are made, from " we are workers, people by whose labour all things are made, from " we are workers, people by whose labour all things are made, from " we are workers, people by whose labour all things are made, from " we are workers, people by whose labour all things are made, from

children ' s toys to massive machines, yet we are people deprived ofchildren ' s toys to massive machines, yet we are people deprived ofchildren ' s toys to massive machines, yet we are people deprived ofchildren ' s toys to massive machines, yet we are people deprived ofchildren ' s toys to massive machines, yet we are people deprived of

the right to defend our human dignity. anyone can exploit us forthe right to defend our human dignity. anyone can exploit us forthe right to defend our human dignity. anyone can exploit us forthe right to defend our human dignity. anyone can exploit us forthe right to defend our human dignity. anyone can exploit us for

their interest. at present we want to achieve a degree of freedomtheir interest. at present we want to achieve a degree of freedomtheir interest. at present we want to achieve a degree of freedomtheir interest. at present we want to achieve a degree of freedomtheir interest. at present we want to achieve a degree of freedom

which will eventually enable us to take all power into our ownwhich will eventually enable us to take all power into our ownwhich will eventually enable us to take all power into our ownwhich will eventually enable us to take all power into our ownwhich will eventually enable us to take all power into our own

hands. our slogans are simple. ' down with private property '. ' allhands. our slogans are simple. ' down with private property '. ' allhands. our slogans are simple. ' down with private property '. ' allhands. our slogans are simple. ' down with private property '. ' allhands. our slogans are simple. ' down with private property '. ' all

means of production in the hands of people. ' ' all power in the handsmeans of production in the hands of people. ' ' all power in the handsmeans of production in the hands of people. ' ' all power in the handsmeans of production in the hands of people. ' ' all power in the handsmeans of production in the hands of people. ' ' all power in the hands

of the people '. ' no one exempt from work '. now you can understandof the people '. ' no one exempt from work '. now you can understandof the people '. ' no one exempt from work '. now you can understandof the people '. ' no one exempt from work '. now you can understandof the people '. ' no one exempt from work '. now you can understand

that we are not just rioters ". " we are revolutionaries and will go onthat we are not just rioters ". " we are revolutionaries and will go onthat we are not just rioters ". " we are revolutionaries and will go onthat we are not just rioters ". " we are revolutionaries and will go onthat we are not just rioters ". " we are revolutionaries and will go on

being revolutionaries as long as some people do nothing but givebeing revolutionaries as long as some people do nothing but givebeing revolutionaries as long as some people do nothing but givebeing revolutionaries as long as some people do nothing but givebeing revolutionaries as long as some people do nothing but give orders and the others do nothing but work " orders and the others do nothing but work " orders and the others do nothing but work " orders and the others do nothing but work " orders and the others do nothing but work " the mother - maxim gorky the russian revolution

these are the words of one of the characters in ' the mother ', the novel written by world famous russian writer maxim gorky. the plight of workers and farmers in russia and their aims are reflected in them. what else can you make out from these words about the then russian society? what were the demands of the workers? abolish the private property system everyone has to work revolutions that influenced the world22 maxim gorky leo tolstoy karl marx frederick engels writers like maxim gorky, leo tolstoy, ivan turgenev, and anton chekov depicted the plight

of the workers and farmers in their works. the marxist ideologies formulated by karl marx and frederick engels stirred the workers. they called for establishing the supremacy of the workers instead of that by the capitalists. trade unions were formed to find remedies for the plight of the workers. based on the marxist ideologies, the social democratic workers party was formed. later, this party was split into the mensheviks ( minority ) and the bolsheviks ( majority ). the main leaders of the bolsheviks were lenin and trotsky. alexander kerensky led the mensheviks.

the crisis reached its worst when russia was defeated in the russia - japan war in 1905. the workers organized a huge march at petrograd on 9 january 1905 demanding political rights and economic reforms. the march was fired at by the soldiers and hundreds of demonstrators were massacred. this event is known as the bloody sunday. workers ' organizations called " the soviets " were formed all over russia to conduct strikes. when the strikes gained massive strength, the emperor was compelled to form a battleship potemkin a famous film of sergei eisenstein, a russian director. it is a silent movie

based on an event during the tsarist regime in russia. it depicts the political rebellion of the dissatisfied navigators in the battleship potemkin. he also directed a film based on ' the ten days that shook the world ', the famous work of john reed. russian revolution was greatly motivated by the despotic rule of tzar ' ' discuss let ' s find the circumstances that led them to demand so. farmers and factory workers in russia led a tragic life under the autocracy of the tzartist emperors, who ruled russia. the low agricultural production affected the farmer ' s income. moreover,

the landless farmers had to pay huge tax. though russia was rich in natural resources, their industrial production was meagre. it was the foreigners who controlled majority of the industries that existed there. revolutions that influenced the world x 23 legislative assembly called duma. ignoring the protest from duma, nicholas ii, the then tsar decided to participate in the first world war that started in 1914. a lot of russian soldiers were killed in this war. food shortage became severe by 1917. thousands of women marched along the streets of petrograd on 8

march 1917 clamouring for bread. the workers organized protest march in petrograd. though the soldiers clashed with the demonstrators in the beginning, later they joined the workers. it was the tragic experience during the first world war that induced them to do so. the workers captured petrograd and nicholas ii was thrown out of power. a provisional government was formed under alexander kerensky, the menshevik leader. since the russian calendar was a few days behind the international calendar, this revolution that took place in march came to be known as the february revolution. marxism

marxism is an ideology founded by karl marx and frederick engels. the core of this ideology is that the changes in society are based on the prevailing mode of production. they exhorted that the dictatorship of the proletariat should be established, for labour is the most important factor of production. analyze the circumstances that led to form a provisional government in russia prepare a presentation that includes both international calendar and russian calendar a group of soviets did not approve of the provisional government. vladimir lenin, who had been in switzerland,

came to russia and strongly opposed the provisional government. he argued that the entire power should be transferred to the soviets if they were to realize the aims of the revolution. the bolsheviks and the soviets supported him. they propagated that only proletarians ' ( workers ) government could eradicate centuries old economic backwardness and inequality. they put forward several demands like : lenin revolutions that influenced the world24 discuss the role of the october revolution in establishing the proletariat government in russia. withdraw russia from the first world war

seize the lands owned by the lords and distribute them among the farmers make factories public property in october 1917, the bolsheviks organized an armed rebellion against the provisional government. kerensky fled from the country and russia came under the control of the bolsheviks. this event, through which the bolsheviks attained power, is known as the october revolution ( as per russian calendar ). subsequently, a convention of the soviets was held and a cabinet was formed with lenin as its head. let us examine the results of russian revolution.

russia withdrew from the first world war seized out the land and distributed among the peasants gave importance to public sector introduced centralized planning achieved develops in the field of science, technology and economy. new constitution came to force in 1924. union of soviet socialist republic was formed by consolidating different soviet republics. spread the socialist ideas all over the world. prepare a timeline showing the important events of russian revolution on a postar. the chinese revolution in the twentieth century china witnessed revolutions against the

foreign rule and monarchy. the colonial powers of europe and america adopted policies in china, different from the ones they had implemented in the colonies of other parts of the world. they were opium trade and open door policy. let ' s discuss them. revolutions that influenced the world x 25 opium trade chinese silk, tea, and earthenware were in great demand all over europe. china gained huge profit through the export of these items. there was nothing to import to china from europe. as a result the european traders suffered a great loss. as a remedy

for this loss, the british traders imported opium, an intoxicant to china. this affected the chinese trade and its consumption made the chinese people mentally imbalanced. it resulted in economic and mental subjugation of the chinese. open door policy by the end of the nineteenth century several european countries acquired trade privileges in china. america could not acquire the privilege as it was not concerned about china at that time. to acquire the privilege, john hey, the then state secretary of the usa proclaimed ' the open door policy '. as per this policy, america

argued for equal rights and opportunities for all countries in chinese market. china was divided into different regions to be controlled by various countries. the aim of this policy was to create an opportunity for the usa to interfere in china. the manchu dynasty in china favoured the foreign interference and domination. some secret organizations in china revolted against it in 1900. the emblem of these organizations was the boxer ' s fist. so this is known as the boxer rebellion. though this rebellion was a failure, it stimulated the revolutions that came up later.

in 1911, another revolution took place under the leadership of dr. sun yat - sen. against the manchu dynasty this ended monarchy in china. after the revolution, kuomintang party established a republican government in southern china under the leadership of sun yat - sen. he gave importance to ideologies like nationalism, democracy, and socialism. ideologies of sun yat - sen nationalism - to expel the manchu dynasty and the imperial powers democracy - to establish democratic rule socialism - to control capital and distribute land equally dr. sun yat - sen

compare the strategies of colonial powers in china with the strategies that they adopted in other colonies. revolutions that influenced the world26 mao zedong prepare a note on the role played by mao zedong to make china a peoples republic " chinese revolution of 1911 led to the liberation of china from foreign powers and monarchy ' ' examine the statement he decided to nullify the unjust treaties signed with the foreign countries and wanted to maintain equality with western countries. the kuomintang republic adopted measures for the progress of

agriculture and industry. china received assistance from russia in various fields and the chinese communist party was formed. in the beginning, the kuomintang and the communists co - operated with each other. but this co - operation was disturbed when chiang kai - shek became the head of the republic following the death of sun yat - sen. republic becomes popular chiang kai - shek ascertained military autocracy in china. he gave opportunity for foreign powers including america to freely interfere in china and did not co - operate with the communists. coal and iron

industries, banking, and foreign trade were all controlled by foreign countries. the communists protested against the policy of ching kai - shek. they were brutally suppressed. at that time mao zedong rose to the leadership of the communist party. in 1934, under the leadership of mao zedong, a journey started from kiangsi in south china. the adventurous trip ended at yanan in north western china. throughout the journey they seized out agricultural land and villages from lords and distributed them among the farmers. the journey covered around 12000 kms. so it is known as the ' long

march '. hence mao zedong and the communist party became the symbol of struggle of the chinese against foreign power. chiang kai - shek had to seek political asylum in taiwan, when the red army of mao zedong captured the centre of kuomintang rule. china became the people ' s republic of china on 1st october 1949 under the leadership of mao zedong. we discussed the revolutions carried out by the people in different parts of the world, who were deprived of freedom. the ideologies put forward by these revolutions were significant in moulding the

modern world. the declarations made by the revolutionaries still exist as a record of human progress. revolutions that influenced the world x 27 collect information on important revolutions of the world and prepare a magazine. compare the revolutions that took place in america, europe, and asia and complete the table below. revolutions the american the french the latin the russian the chinese war of revolution american revolution revolution independence revolution period leaders major aims ideologies / thinkers major impact george washington, thomas jefferson, thomas paine voltaire,

rousseau, montesquieu francisco miranda, simon bolivar, jose de san martin kerensky, lenin, trotsky sun yat - sen, mao zedong revolutions that influenced the world against the colonialism of england against autocracy and feudal system against the domination of spain and portugal against monarchy and feudalism against foreign power, feudal system, and manchu rule american war of independence french revolution latin american revolution russian revolution chinese revolution revolutions that influenced the world28 collect the works of the thinkers and writers who influenced various

revolutions and prepare a note,. collect information on important revolutions in the world and prepare a magazine. ' american war of independence was a movement of the english against england '. substantiate the statement how did the resentment of the middle class lead to the french revolution? arrange the following events in chronological order. i. february revolution ii. long march iii. american declaration of independence iv. tennis court oath how did the french revolution influence the reforms of napoleon? how did the colonial rule influence the latin american countries?

' russian revolution helped the progress of the working class '. do you agree with this statement? why? how did china become a people ' s republic? analyse the map of the continent of africa is given. find out the speciality of the boundaries of african countries. you will see that most of the borderlines are straight. why do the african countries share straight borderlines? the europeans, who reached africa in search of natural resources, partitioned the continent at the beginning of the 20th century. on the basis of some agreements

among the european countries, they divided the african nations amongst themselves by just drawing straight lines on the map. world in the twentieth century 30 why did the european nations partition africa? this is a part of exploitation of resources by the european countries. similar process occured in other parts of the world. from capitalism to imperialism in the previous classes, we have discussed the industrial revolution that began in the eighteenth century. it gradually spread from england to other countries of europe. capitalists invested in factories and production

was increased. this increased their profit. the economic system in which production and distribution are controlled by the capitalists with the aim to increase profit is known as capitalism. the advent of large - scale industries enhanced capital investment. many nations produced more than they needed and more than they could accommodate in their domestic markets. this over - production forced them to search for markets. the search for markets by the industrialized countries in europe led to competition among them. the europeans had already established trade relationship with asian,

african and latin american nations. using political power and military forces, the european countries economically exploited these nations. later, they became the colonies of european countries. this process is called colonization. a factory in england of the 1800s how did industrial revolution cause colonization? prepare a flow chart and explain. trade unions were formed to protest against capitalist exploitation. constant agitations of trade unions and the resultant increase in their wages diminished the profit of the capitalists.

european countries had considered the colonies as the source of raw materials and the market for their industrial products. later on, colonial masters started to invest capital in the colonies. let ' s find the factors that induced them to do so. x world in the twentieth century 31 the first world war the conflicts among the imperialist powers ultimately led the entire world to a war. let ' s find out the reason behind this. the european nations vied with each other in establishing colonies. this competition led to conflicts among them and caused

mutual distrust and enmity. this further drove the nations to the signing of military alliances. the triple alliance and the triple entente were examples of such military alliances. how did industrial revolution cause conflicts among nations? how does imperialism differ from colonization? how did imperialism affect the colonies? traditional economic system of the colonies was destroyed administrative and judicial systems were replaced. people in colonies were forced to cultivate cash crops in lieu of traditional food crops. poverty and unemployment increased

natural resources were widely exploited indigenous arts, literature, language, culture and education system were destroyed. competition and conflict among imperialist nations for colonies and markets led to the outbreak of wars. the distinctive phase of flow of finance capital to colonies is known as imperialism. imposing a nation ' s political, economic and cultural dominance on another nation is a fundamental feature of imperialism. colonialists imposed their dominance using legal system, administrative measures, military force, etc. availability of raw materials cheap labour

low cost involved in manufacturing and selling goods in colonies world in the twentieth century 32 triple alliance germany austria - hungary italy triple entente england france russia the formation of such alliances created a war atmosphere in europe. they started manufacturing and buying lethal weapons. the european nations resorted to various strategies to succeed in their imperialistic competitions. aggressive nationalism was one among them. the european nations used aggressive nationalism to invade other countries. aggressive nationalists considered their

own nations as the supreme and justified whatever be the actions of their nations. various movements in europe such as pan - slave, pan - german, revenge movement were an offshoot of aggressive nationalism. pan - slav movement russia wanted to unite the slavic people of serbia, bulgaria, greece, etc. in eastern europe under her leadership. for this the pan - slav movement was formed with the help of russia. pan - german movement to establish its dominance in central europe and balkan provinces, germany planned to unite the teutonic people. this pan - german movement came into being under the

leadership of germany. revenge movement in 1871, germany occupied alsace - lorraine, the territories that were under the control of france. to regain these territories, the revenge movement was formed under the leadership of france. x world in the twentieth century 33 imperialist rivalry drove the european countries into several crisis, among which the moroccan crisis and the balkan crisis are considered to be important. imperialist crisis moroccan crisis a secret treaty was signed between britain and france in 1904. according to this britain recognized the claim of france over morocco.

the french claim over morocco was opposed by germany which sent battleships to the moroccan port, agadir. france agreed to transfer a part of french congo to germany and germany agreed to concede morocco to france in return. thus the problem was solved temporarily. however, their rivalry continued. balkan crisis the balkan region is situated in europe, close to the aegean sea and the black sea. it was a part of the ottoman empire. in 1912, balkan league ( greece, bulgaria, serbia and montenegro ) defeated turkey. however, the conflict among the allied nations in sharing the benefits

of war led to the break - up of the league and resulted in wars among them. when austria laid its claim over the balkan region with the support of germany, serbia claimed this region with the support of russia. during this time, a serbian youth gaverilo prinsep, assassinated francis ferdinand, the heir to the throne of austria at the bosnian capital sarajevo in july 1914. austria held serbia responsible for it and declared war on serbia on 28 july 1914. the allied nations rushed to help their allies. almost all the nations

of the world directly or indirectly were involved in it. therefore this war is known as the first world war. nt - 479 - 3 - soc. sci. - i - 10 - e - vol. 1 nt - 479 - 2 - soc. sci - i - 10 - e - vol. 1 world in the twentieth century 34 ' grand illusion ', one of the best war films directed by jean renoir tells the story of french prisoners during first world war. the prints of ' grand illusion ' were destroyed by the nazis but were discovered later. ' all quiet on the western front ' directed by lewis milestone and stanley kubrick ' s ' paths of glory ' are visual manifestations of the first world war. war on celluloid

aftermath of the war how did the competitions among the imperialist nations lead the world to a war? discuss ' the treaty of versailles was an example of the vengeance against the defeated nations ' - discuss. the first world war ended in 1918. it produced far reaching impact across the world. over 10 million people lost their lives or were injured in the war. agriculture, industry and communication system were destroyed. poverty, unemployment and inflation increased. economic dominance of europe diminished. liberation movements in asia and africa strengthened.

in a bid to bring about peace in the world, the league of nations was formed. peace efforts a peace conference was convened at paris in 1919 to discuss post - war situation, under the leadership of the winning allies, britain and france. they signed different treaties with the defeated nations. among these treaties, the versailles treaty signed with germany in 1919 was the most important one. according to this treaty, german colonies were divided among the victorious powers and germany was forced to pay a huge amount as war indemnity. the allies occupied

the rich mines of germany. above all war guilt was imposed on germany and was disarmed. x world in the twentieth century 35 economic depression the united states of america was not affected by the war. hence, the european nations managed to get loans from the usa. consequently, american dollar overtook british pound as the basis of foreign exchange holding. as a result, the united states of america emerged as a new economic power outside europe. the economic growth of the usa did not last long. the world was thrown into economic crisis in 1929, which originated in the usa.

let ' s look at the impacts of this economic depression. people who became pauper because of the war, couldn ' t afford the commodities. goods were kept unsold in factories european nations failed to repay their debts to the usa banks collapsed inflation became uncontrollable acute unemployment and poverty to overcome this crisis, the european nations adopted a strategy of imposing heavy taxes on the colonies. therefore, the economic crisis of imperialist nations became a burden to the colonies. black thursday the stock market crash in new york stock exchange on

24 october 1929 is known as the ' black thursday '. the crash wiped out in a single day the entire economic growth till then. in panic, investors rushed to sell their stocks, which led to a massive volume of stock trade. ultimately, this led to abrupt and dramatic price decline. the great depression that left disastrous impact on both america and european nations followed the crash. many lost their wealth and those who couldn ' t bear the loss, committed suicide. the production rate plunged ; unemployment became grave and world trade completely collapsed.

find out how the economic depression in the united states of america affected the economy of other nations and prepare a short note. world in the twentieth century 36 fascism and nazism to those who can hear me, i say - do not despair. the misery that is now upon us is but the passing of greed - the bitterness of men who fear the way of human progress. the hate of men will pass, and dictators die, and the power they took from the people will return to the people. and so long as men live, liberty will never perish. from charlie chaplin ' s film ' the great dictator '

this was charlie chaplin ' s view on the dictatorship that became prevalent in some european nations after the first world war. let ' s see the circumstances which led to the formation of such governments. the first world war devastated both the allies. many european governments lost their power. people were in misery. unemployment, poverty and inflation gnawed their entire system. fascism in italy and nazism in germany rose to power, capitalizing on the political and economic chaos prevailing then. economic destruction, rivalry

against the victors, aimlessness etc. facilitated these forces to grab power. here are the characteristics of fascism. fascism the term ' fascism ' is derived from the latin word ' faces ' which means ' a tied bundle of rods, with a protruding axe '. it was the symbol of collectivism and power in ancient rome. antagonism to democracy glorifying the nation justifying war deifying the past opposition to socialism adoring the purity of race diffusion of aggressive nationalism indoctrination of ideologies through arts, literature and education fascism

military dictatorship destruction of political rivals x world in the twentieth century 37 mussolini and fascism " war is to man what maternity is to woman. " mussolini these are the words of benito mussolini, who led fascist reign in italy. let ' s discuss the circumstances under which the fascist party came to power in italy. italy got nothing, though she was with the victors in the first world war. post - war destruction of industries, unemployment, increase in tax, inflation etc. kept people away from the government. industrialists, in fear of italy moving to

socialism, were prompted to support fascism. mussolini resorted to despotic measures in the political and economic fields of italy. violence and ferocity were the strategies of the fascists. socialists and leaders of peasants and workers were proclaimed as enemies of the nation. those who opposed the fascist party were executed. the aim of mussolini was to restore ancient roman empire. as part of this, he adopted several symbols of ancient roman administration. using his military force the ' black shirts ', mussolini suppressed the opponents through fascist policies.

his aggressive foreign policy led him to conquer nations like ethiopia, albania etc. italy ' s run for dictatorship paved the way for the outbreak of another war. " fascism was a product of the first world war " - discuss. benito mussolini victorious italy when the first world war broke out, italy withdrew from the triple alliance and joined the british - french alliance. hence by the end of the war, italy was with the victors. matteotti matteotti was an eminent socialist thinker of italy. he elucidated fascist activities to common people and openly spoke out against mussolini and fascism. this

provoked the fascists, which ultimately led to his murder on the street. world in the twentieth century 38 hitler and nazism " first they came for the socialists, and i did not speak out - because i was not a socialist. then they came for the trade unionists, and i did not speak out - because i was not a trade unionist. then they came for the jews, and i did not speak out - because i was not a jew. then they came for me - and there was no one left to speak for me. " adolf hitler anne frank ' s diary anne frank ' s diary entries are the testament of the assault and cruelty of nazi

rule. anne frank, along with her family, went into hiding during the war, but, were caught later. anne frank and her sister were detained in the auschwitz concentration camp. both of them died in the same camp. gernam paster - pastor martin niemoller nazism is the german version of fascism. let ' s look at the factors that helped hitler, the leader of nazi party come to power in germany the treaty of versailles imposed by the victorious allies on germany after the first world war. economic destruction and inflation. failure of german government and the resultant political uncertainty.

with his oratory skills and organizational abilities, hitler easily succeeded in gaining popular support. he dismissed the government and captured power. socialists, communists, jews and democrats were executed. hitler held the jews responsible for germany ' s ruin and humiliation. jews were massacred enmasse in specially built concentration camps. this is known as the holocaust. a military force ' brown shirts ' and a secret police troop ' gestapo ' were in charge of assaulting and massacring the jews. hitler projected the purity of the aryan race and argued that aryans

should rule the world. he deified the aryans ancestry of the germans. all other political parties, except the nazi party, were banned. trade unions also were banned. chempakaraman pillai and the nazis chempakaraman pillai was a malayali activist and revolutionary, who fought for the freedom of india until his death. he was the foreign minister of the provisional government of india set up in kabul under raja mahendra pratap. he had the privilege of being the only foreign member in pan german nationalist party. as he raised his views against hitler and nazi

party, he became their enemy. his assets were confiscated. it is reported that the nazis, under orders from hitler, killed chempakaraman pillai. x world in the twentieth century 39 military service was made compulsory. hitler incited a spirit of revenge among the germans against the terms of the treaty of versailles. he used newspapers, radio, cinema, and education systems widely to propagate the ideologies of nazism. taking advantage of the feeling of revenge among germans, hitler adopted an aggressive foreign policy. he attacked austria and czechoslovakia. germany formed alliance

with italy and japan. it was opposed by other countries. ultimately this led to the outbreak of another world war. pictures of the concentration camp where jews and communists were massacred how did fascism in italy and nazism in germany defy world peace? conduct a seminar on this topic. the ideologies put forth by both fascists and nazis had several similarities. find some examples from the textbook and complete the table. purity of race ideology fascism nazism the second world war twenty years after the end of the first world war, the world

witnessed another war. let ' s look at the backdrop of the second world war that lasted from 1939 to 1945. following the peace treaty at paris in 1919, the victorious nations shared the colonies of the defeated nations. neither germany nor italy had any colony or market. therefore, for enhancing their political - economic stability, italy and germany planned to conquer colonies and attack weak nations. in an effort to extend this policy of aggression, italy and germany along with japan formed an alliance called the axis powers. countering this alliance, britain, france and

china formed the allied powers. world in the twentieth century 40 axis powers germany italy japan allied powers england france china munich pact munich pact can be cited as the best example of the policy of appeasement. hitler put forth the claims over the prosperous sudetenland region of czechoslovakia. to discuss the issue, the representatives of britain, france, germany and italy met in the german city of munich. they approved the claim of germany over sudetenland without consulting czechoslovakia. ' the reasons behind the outbreak of first world war

and second world war had several similarities '. analyze the statement. given below are some of the outcomes of the first world war. discuss how they resulted in the second world war. the treaty of versailles formation of the league of nations the emergence of fascism and nazism later america and soviet union also joined the anti - fascist alliance. the league of nations failed to stall the attacks of the axis powers. when germany, italy and japan attacked other nations, capitalist countries like britain and france did not prevent the attacks. they considered soviet

union, being a socialist country, as their chief enemy. this policy which encouraged facsist attacks is known as the policy of appeasement. on 1 st september 1939, germany attacked poland. this prompted the allied nations to declare war against germany that ultimately resulted in the outbreak of the second world war. non - aggression pact in 1939, germany signed a non - aggression pact with soviet union. according to this pact, both the countries agreed not to attack each other and to partition poland. however, the pact came to an end when hitler attacked soviet union in 1941. x

world in the twentieth century 41 effects of the war the entry of soviet union and america changed the complexion of the second world war. italy and germany could not withstand the attack and surrendered immediately. mussolini was killed by the local partisans. hitler committed suicide. the soviet army moved towards japan through trans - siberia. but before it could reach japan, the united states of america dropped two atom bombs in japan - ' little boy ' in hiroshima on 6 august 1945 and ' fat man ' in nagasaki on 9 august. soon, japan surrendered. pearl harbour attack in 1941, japan attacked

pearl harbour, the american naval base in the islands of hawaii. what prompted japan was the economic interest of these countries in the pacific region. this directly resulted in the american entry into the second world war. given are the pictures related to the atomic bombings in japan. far reaching consequences of second world war are given below : over 10 million people died economic system of european countries was destroyed european dominance in world diminished freedom movements in asia and africa intensified america and soviet union emerged as global powers

in a bid to preserve and maintain world peace, the united nations organization ( uno ) was formed. prepare a digital album on japan ' s miseries followed by america ' s atomic bombings. a clock that stopped at the moment of bombing atom bomb explosion hiroshima after bombing hibakusha ' hibakusha ' is the japanese word for the surviving victims of the atomic bombings of hiroshima and nagasaki. the word literally translates as " explosion - affected people " there are many of them in japan, battling against the terrible after - effects of the radiation from bombings. world in the twentieth century 42

make a short film including the pictures and news of the catastrophes of two world wars. u. n. emblem u. n. flag sadaco sadaco sasuki, a japanese girl, was a victim of the radiation from atomic bombing at hiroshima. the paper cranes she made when bed - ridden became the symbol of anti - war feeling. on the wings of peace do you observe this day in your school? what is the significance of the day? october 24 is observed as united nations ( un ) day. although the league of nations was established following the first world war, it failed to maintain world peace. after the second world war, efforts

were taken to set up an organization for preserving global peace. this resulted in the establishment of the united nations organization on 24 october 1945. the headquarters of the un is in new york, united states of america. some of its objectives are to save the succeeding generations from the scourge of war to protect international treaties and laws and to foster social and economic development of countries. war affects both innocents and culprits. prepare a note on the lessons that we can imbibe from the first and second world wars. pablo picasso ' s famous painting ' guernica ' and

ernest hemingway ' s novel ' for whom the bell tolls ' are considered as the artistic outburst towards the second world war. polish director andrzej wajda ' s trilogy of war films ' a generation ', ' canal ' and ' ashes and diamonds ', david lean ' s ' the bridge on the river kwai ', charlie chaplin ' s ' the great dictator ', alain resnais ' ' hiroshima mon amour ' and steven spielberg ' s ' schindler ' s list ' are noteworthy films on the second world war. war in artworks x world in the twentieth century 43 colonies become free post - second world war, dominance of imperial powers was

questioned. european countries could not suppress the intensified nationalist movements in colonies. the usa and the ussr, which emerged as super powers after the second world war, supported freedom movements in various european colonies. gradually, colonies started to secure freedom from the imperialist control. this process is called decolonization. look at the pictures given below. these are the pictures of the leaders who fought for freedom for their countries. nelson mandela - south africa quami nkrumah - ghana jomo kenyatta - kenya mahatma gandhi - india

prepare a magazine on the liberated nations and their leaders in asia and africa. cold war the usa and the ussr that formed anti - fascist alliance during the second world war parted from each other after the war. the usa floated a new alliance of capitalist countries while the ussr led socialist nations. these two blocs - capitalist bloc and socialist bloc that represented contradictory ideas - continued their political and diplomatic wars. this enmity based on ideological conflict and diplomatic confrontations was called the cold war. cold war american economist bernard baruch first

used the word ' cold war '. walter lippmann gave the term wide currency with his book ' the cold war '. world in the twentieth century 44 it was the conflicting ideologies that led to ' cold war '? evaluate military pacts during cold war north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) - america and allies south east asia treaty organization ( seato ) - america and allies central treaty organization ( cento ) - america and allies warsaw pact - soviet union and allies non - aligned movement : an alternative to bipolar blocs these are the pictures of the leaders who introduced the concept of

non - alignment in lieu of the capitalist bloc and the socialist bloc. bipolar world though the usa and the ussr were in the same ally during the second world war, differences among the countries led them to lead the capitalist bloc and socialist bloc respectively. historian arnold toynbee had described this ideological division as ' bipolar world '. gamal abdul nasser egypt marshal tito yugoslavia ahmed sukarno indonesia jawaharlal nehru india what is non aligned movement? following the second world war, many asian, african and latin

american countries became independent. they realized that the cold war was yet another face of imperialism and that it would threaten world peace. the liberated nations decided not to join any of the blocs and formed the non - aligned movement. they understood that the race of super powers for weapons and a stronger military force would pose harm to them. they realized that only a world sans wars and conflicts accelerates economic and social development. x world in the twentieth century 45 the idea of the non - aligned movement was mooted at a meeting

held bandung in indonesia in 1955. the first conference of the non - aligned countries was held in belgrade in 1961. " non alignment doesn ' t mean to keep aloof from world affairs. rather, it is to face many issues we confront, " jawaharlal nehru said, indicating the objectives of the movement. how did decolonization and cold war lead to the formation of non - aligned movement? conduct a seminar on the topic " the impacts of the second world war on world history ". areas to be considered : liberation of asian and african countries non - aligned movement cold war west asia

" " today i came bearing an olive branch in one hand, and the freedom fighter ' s gun in the other. don ' t let the olive leaves fall from my hand. " this is an extract from the speech delivered by the chairman of the palestine liberation organization ( plo ), yasser arafat in the un assembly, 1974. what would be the circumstances that prompted him to deliver such a speech? until the first world war, the territory including palestine was part of the turkish empire. as turkey was defeated in the war, britain took over the region. since the jews helped britain in the war,

the then british foreign secretary arthur balfour declared the establishment of a jewish nation in west asia as a reward. it is known as balfour declaration. zionism is an international movement with an objective of the establishment of a homeland for the jews. we have already discussed the assault and cruelty of hitler towards the jews. this intensified the demand for a separate jewish state. in 1948, the nation israel was formed. consequently, many wars broke out between israel and the arab nations. israel seized palestine, expelling the palestinians from

their homeland. the palestinian refugees migrated to various arab yasser arafat in u. n assembly world in the twentieth century 46 countries. in this context, with an objective of establishing a nation for the palestinians, a movement called palestine liberation organization ( plo ) was founded with yasser arafat as the president. after a series of bloodsheds and massacres, israel agreed in principle to recognize palestine as a free nation. this agreement mediated by the us is called the oslo pact ( 1993 ). but, the provisions in the pact are yet be implemented.

images of the conflict in west asia examine how imperialist interests caused the unrest in west asia. prepare a news bulletin incorporating news on current events in west asia. oil as a political weapon west asia holds half of the world ' s total oil reserves. following the arab - israeli war, an organization ( organization of petroleum exporting countries - opec ) of oil exporting countries was formed. arab nations used oil export as a strategy to resolve palestine issue. they executed this strategy by reducing oil production and hiking the price zionism an international movement

to establish a jewish state. the idea of establishing a jewish homeland was first mooted by the writer theodor herzl. he proposed his idea of jewish homeland in his book ' the jewish state '. disintegration of the soviet union the disintegration of the soviet union is one of the significant events in the last decade of the 20th century. let ' s see what led to the disintegration of soviet union : the administrative measures of mikhail gorbachev ( glasnost and perestroika ) deviation from the basic principles of socialism gorbachev x world in the twentieth century 47

corruption and inefficiency of the bureaucracy. failure in bringing about changes in economic sector with the resignation of gorbachev as president in 1991, soviet union formally ceased to exist. naturally, this ended cold war. the disintegration of the soviet union had a wide impact on international relations. a unipolar world has emerged under the leadership of the usa in the place of a bipolar one. unipolar world - american dominance america emerged as a global power and centre of world politics following the disintegration of soviet union. this is called unipolar world order.

several strategies were adopted by america to establish its dominance over the world. let ' s see what they are : utilizing international agencies, america provided financial and military aids to countries of the world. extended military alliances media were used to promote america ' s vested interests it was america ' s imperialist policy that paved the way for the gulf war. america utilized their military facilities and technological progress in these wars. however, movements have taken roots in different parts of the world to protest against the supremacy of america.

glasnost and perestroika glasnost and perestroika were mikhail gorbachev ' s two administrative reforms in soviet union. glasnost was to implement openness in political processes. accordingly, regulation on media and civil rights was taken off. perestroika was implemented to restructure the economic system of soviet union. perestroika called for ending the price controls on production sector established by the government and abating centralization. gulf war gulf wars of 1991 and 2003 were two important events that post - world war ii period witnessed. the war broke out following the invasion of

saddam hussein, ruler of iraq, on kuwait. the military alliance of america and britain attacked iraq and emancipated kuwait. the war was the outbreak of the disputes over dominance on regulating petroleum products. world in the twentieth century 48 neo imperialism in the post - war period, a new kind of imperialism emerged. multinational companies, which are registered in a country and functioning in many countries, began to interfere in the economic, social and cultural sectors of the latter for serving the interests of the capitalist countries. it is known as neo imperialism.

the multinational companies competed with one another to control the resources and assets of the third world countries. they promoted consumerism in third world countries to sell their products. developing nations were considered as the markets for the multinational companies. in fact, the products of developed nations started reaching even the villages of developing nations. due to the pressure from multinational products and marketing strategies, the economy of many countries started to collapse. how does neo imperialism affect the economy of third world countries? new economic policy

globalisation, liberalisation and privatisation are the concepts of new imperialism globalization posed some challenges to the developing countries. adoption of liberal regulations and taxation systems to facilitate the import of multinational products to domestic markets. liberalisation privatisation of public sector undertakings in an attempt to promote private sector. privatisation economic system of the country linked to global economy. the interests and motives of the multinational companies protected. competition driven market came into existence.

trans - border flow of products, services, raw materials, capital, latest technology and human resources facilitated. globalisation x world in the twentieth century 49 prepare a digital collage of events of the 20th century world in the twentieth century triple alliance, triple entente benito mussolini, adolf hitler axis powers, allied powers united nations organization, cold war, liberation of asian and african countries, non - aligned movement, neo imperialism the first world war fascism and nazism the second world war post - war world

international organizations such as the world bank, international monetary fund, world trade organization, etc. are devising and executing various policies in favour of globalization. globalization opend up many opportunities and possibilities around the world. the transfer of goods, products and services beyond boundaries and the dissemination of information technology shaped the concept of global village. however, globalization posed some challenges to the developing countries. • the intervention of multinational companies challenged the concept of nation state.

• led to the destruction of indigenous culture. • price of agricultural products plunged • public sector undertakings were destroyed • government withdrew from social service sectors • natural resources were looted how far does globalization influence our everyday life? discuss. we have discussed how various incidents and events during the 20th century in different parts of the world influenced the history of the world. the circumstances that led to the beginning of imperialism, the challenges faced by imperialism and the impact of imperialism had a crucial role in shaping

the history of the 20th century. world in the twentieth century 50 prepare an essay on ' the impact of multinational companies on our daily life. ' organize an exhibition collecting anti - war pictures, photos, news, poems, quotes, etc. conduct a ' un day quiz programme ' on the occasion of un day observance. what is meant by imperialism? how does colonization differ from imperialism? ' ' paris peace conference led to the outbreak of the second world war. ' ' do you agree with this comment? why? what are the factors that led america into economic crisis? list the features of fascism.

match column a with column b ab adolf hitler world war i treaty of versailles gestapo disintegration of the italy soviet union benito mussolini mikhail gorbachev elucidate the political circumstances that resulted in palestine - israel conflict. examine the relevance of non - alignment, what are the changes that the disintegration of the soviet union brought to the world? from sureshkumar anaswara, vazhuthacadu thiruvananthapuram to the public information officer government higher secondary school karamana, thiruvananthapuram sir,

i request you to furnish information regarding the following questions about the school library functioning in your school under right to information act 2005. 1. does a school library function in your school? if yes, specify the working hours. 2. is there a librarian in charge of the library? 3. how many books are there in the school library as per the stock register? 4. what are the periodicals subscribed in the school library? thiruvananthapuram ( sd - ) 25 / 08 / 15 sureshkumar public administration 52 you have familiarised with an application submitted under the right

to information act. the main function of the school is to provide learning opportunities to students. school libraries play a prominent role in this. like the school there are a number of government institutions around us related to our day to day life. some of these institutions and their functions are given below. expand the table by writing more. the definition of a western administrative thinker, gladden who analysed public administration, is given above. from this definition we can understand that the important area of public administration

is governmental administration. public administration is the effective utilization of men and materials for the implementation of existing laws, governmental policies, programmes and developmental projects. governmental institutions are part of public administration. they function for the welfare of the people. institutions functions primary health centre provides treatment facilities krishi bhavan promotes agriculture police station maintains law and order from the table we can understand that every institution performs

distinct functions. it is the duty of these institutions to implement the rules and development programmes formed by the government. public administration public administration is concerned with the administration of the government. n. gladden x public administration 53 an administrative system is needed for governments to exist and function. the history of public administration begins with the formation of state. based on differences in the form of government we can find differences in public administration also. during monarchy, the

interests of the monarch was the basis of public administration. but in democratic system, importance is given to the interests of the people. democratic administration becomes more effective and efficient thorugh public administration. discuss and list out the changes in the objectives of public administration in monarchy and democracy. importance of public administration observe the news titles given. some services that people receive through government institutions are stated in them. governments try to find solutions to various problems and ensure the welfare of the people through public

administration. find out the significance of public administration from the chart given below. ensure welfare of the people findout solutions to public issues provide goods and services formulate governmental policies significance of public administration public administration 54 what is the message of gandhiji ’ s words? according to him, who should get the benefits of administration? gandhiji expected the protection of the interests of all through public administration. but there are a number of persons in our society who require special consideration and protection. he opined that public

administration should consider them specially and protect them. whom do you wish to get the services of public administration? discuss in your class and write your conclusion. gandhiji ’ s concept of grama swaraj influenced india ’ s outlook of public administration to a great extent. local government institutions were constituted on this basis. we have discussed local self governments in previous classes. bureaucracy the news titles refer to the decisions of the government for public welfare. who provide these services to people?

bureaucracy is constituted to help and advise the government and to execute the programmes. a public administrative system from the local to the national level is constituted for this. several employees have been appointed for the day - to - day functioning of these institutions. the bureaucrats make the public administration system dynamic. all the services of government reach the people through them. the employees x public administration 55 who work under public administrative system and administer the country are together known as ‘ bureaucracy ’.

a country develops when human and material resources are utilised to the maximum. it is the bureaucracy which prepares plans for their scientific utilisation and implements them effectively. bureaucracy has certain basic features. let ’ s examine them. hierarchical organisation bureaucracy is organised in such a way that there is one employee at the top and the number increases when it reaches the lower levels. this is known as hierarchical organisation. permanence persons appointed will continue in service till the age of retirement. appointment on the basis of qualification

employees are recruited and appointed on the basis of educational qualification. political neutrality bureaucrats are liable to implement the policies of whichever party comes to power. party interests should not reflect in their work. they should act neutrally. professionalism every government employee must be skilled in their work. features of bureaucracy visit a nearby government office and prepare a report on the features of bureaucracy there. the above mentioned features of bureaucracy makes administration easy and effective. in all democratic countries bureaucracies will have

these features. public administration 56 indian civil service all india services recruits at national level appoints in central or state service eg : indian administrative service, indian police service central services recruits at national level appoints in central government departments only eg : indian foreign service, indian railway service state services recruits at state level appoints in state government departments only eg : sales tax officer. bureaucracy in india have you notice the notification of the kerala public service

commission for recruitment to the government service. this is the initial step for the recruitment of employees to various departments of the government. then persons are selected on the basis of merit after screening test / interview and appointed in different government offices. all those who are appointed in this way are part of the civil service of india. all the employees who work under the central and the state governments and the employees under the public sector undertakings are part of india ’ s civil service. observe the chart showing the classification of india ’ s civil service.

candidates to all india services and central services are recruited by the union public service commission ( upsc ). the chairman and the members of this commission are appointed by the president of india. the upsc has elaborate mechanisms for the recruitment of candidates based on qualification. upsc x public administration 57 at the state level, candidates are recruited by the public service commission ( psc ) of the state. the governor appoints the chairman and the members of the state public service commission. upsc and state psc ’ s are constituted on the basis of

constitutional provisions. so they are called constitutional institutions. hierarchical organisation, one of the significant features of bureaucracy creates delay in taking decision in administrative field. to solve this and provide better service easily, the government has taken certain steps. let us examine them. administrative reforms a number of steps are taken by the government for increasing the efficiency of the services and to provide service to people in a time bound manner. they are known as administrative reforms. the

intention is to make administration people friendly and efficient. for this government constitutes administrative reform commissions at national and state levels. let ’ s familiarise with some steps taken for administrative reforms in our country. you can become collector the highest administrative officer of the district is the collector. persons in ias cadre are appointed as collectors. the examination conducted by upsc for this is known as the civil service examination. the basic qualification for submitting application is a degree in any subject from a university.

candidates having the highest ranks are placed in ias cadre and is given training. candidates to ips are also recruited from the same examination. kerala psc public administration 58 discuss and prepare a note on the changes to be made in the administrative system. the observation of apj adbul kalam, former president of india, about e - governance is given above. developments attained in the field of science and technology should be utilised in the administrative sector also. e - governance is the use of electronic technology in administration. this helped to obtain

government services easily in a speedy manner. the single window system for admission to higher secondary courses, online applications for various scholarships, etc. are examples for e - governance. let ’ s examine the benefits of e - governance : can receive service with the help of information technology. need not to wait in government offices for services. government services offered speedily and with less expense. efficiency of the offices and quality of the service get enhanced. e - governance akshaya centre for the benefit of people akshya centres have been constituted to make use of

government service delivered through e - governance. it also aims at making people e - literate. e - literacy is the awareness about basic information about internet technology. x public administration 59 these facilities are now available in all government offices. the basic facilities are ensured to all through the akshaya centres in kerala. people can receive the services of e - governance at home with the spread of e - literacy. right to information reply to application for right to information from public information officer government higher secondary school karamana, thiruvanthapuram. to

sri. sureshkumar anaswara, vazhuthacaud, thiruvananthapuram. sir sub : the right to information act 2005 - information - reg ref : your application dated 25 / 08 / 2015. the information you demanded through the application under right to information is furnished below. answers are given in order of questions. answer 1 : yes, 10 am to 4 pm answer 2 : no special librarian. one teacher of this school is given charge. answer 3 : as per the stock register there are, 6216 books in the library. answer 4 : newspapers, weeklies, monthlies.

if you have any complaint about the reply you can approach the appellate authority within 3 days. address of the appeal authority name : appeal authority, deo, thiruvananthapuram yours faithfully thiruvananthapuram ( sd / - ) date : 08 / 09 / 2015 public information officer. the reply to the the application you have seen at the beginning of the chapter is given above. you can collect information from any government office about its working. people got this opportunity under the right to information act 2005. public administration 60

the efforts of mazdoor kisan shakti samghathan of rajasthan has led to the legislation of right to information act. the interventions of several organisations and social activists also helped the passing of the right to information act 2005. this ensures the right of all citizens of india to receive information. how far the right to information act make the general administration system efficient. evaluate the main objectives of this act are to prevent corruption, create responsibility and make the functioning of the government

transparent. the citizens will get copies of public documents if they apply for them. information commission to perform the functions under the right to information act, information commissions are constituted at the national and state levels. there will be a chief information commissioner and not more than ten members in the information commission. if the authorities do not give, or refuse to give the information or gave wrong and unsatisfactory replies, one can approach the information commission and can file an appeal. if the commission is convinced, a fine of rs. 250 per day can

be imposed on the employee concerned till the information is given. public information files, documents, circulars, memos, advice, orders, agreements, statistics, reports, log books, press notes, samples, models, information in the form of electronic data, e - mail, etc in government offices and information on private institutions under the custody of public offices are considered as public information. the right to information is the right to examine and demand copies of the above information under the disposal of government institutions and institutions which receive government funds.

but information relating to the security and integrity of the nation, matters under the consideration of court, and those which endanger the life and liberty of individuals should not be released. what are the situations in our society where the right to information act can be positively used? discuss and prepare a note. x public administration 61 right to service a board exhibited in a government office is given. from this we can identify the services given from the government office. right to service act is a law which ensures services to the people. this law determines the time limit

for every service given by a government office. if the deserved service is not given within this time limit, the responsible employee should pay a fine. as per the right to service act, an officer is appointed in every government office to give guidance and proper help to the applicants. due to the continued interventions of the civil society, the governments have also taken some other steps to make administration more efficient. let ’ s look at some of them. lokpal and lokayuktha lokpal and lokayukta are institutions constituted to prevent

corruption at administrative, bureaucratic and political levels. the institution constituted at the national level to prevent corruption is lokpal. lokpal has the power to register cases on issues of corruption against employees and public workers and can suggest necessary actions. lokayukta is the institution constituted at the state level to hear the corruption cases. both of them follow judicial procedures. discuss whether the right to service act is helpful for the people to get the service they should obtain from government offices. public administration 62 central vigilance commission

observe the board given below. you can see such boards in all government offices. it states what you should do if you find corruption. the central vigilance commission is the institution constituted at the national level to prevent corruption. it came into effect in 1964. it is formed to prevent corruption in the central government offices. the central vigilance commissioner is the head of the central vigilance commission. in every department there will be a chief vigilance officer. the duty of the commission is to enquire into vigilance cases and take necessary actions.

based on the model of the central vigilance commission state vigilance commissions have been constituted at state level. the state vigilance commission inquires into corruption in the state government offices. vigilance courts are also constituted to track vigilance cases. ombudsman elected representatives and bureaucrats are part of public administration. complaints can be filed against their corruption, nepotism or financial misappropriation or negligence of duties. ombudsman is constituted for this purpose. a retired judge of the high court is appointed as the ombudsman.

people can directly approach the ombudsman with complaints. on receiving complaints, the ombudsman has the power to summon anyone and can order enquiry and recommend actions. ombudsman x public administration 63 prepare a digital assignment clearly highlighting the relevance and the importance of public administration what is the use of ombudsman to the public? prepare a note. can we make government services transparent and corruption - free through the above mentioned systems? conduct a debate. all india service public administration bureaucracy in india significance of public

administration bureaucracy administrative reforms central service e - govern - ance right to infor - mation right to service central vigilance commi - ssion lokpal state service information commission ombudsman lokyukta has its beginning in banking sector to hear the complaints of clients and rectify them. delayed service, denial of right to service or making service as favour is considered as corruption in modern society. our public administration tries to impliment the outllook that government service is not a favour, but right of the people. public administration 64

prepare an application for getting information from an office under the right to information act. collect the news and pictures related to anti - corruption activities and prepare a collage. exhibit it in the class. prepare a chart on the importance of the all india services. prepare a questionire to conduct an interview with your district collector. explain the need of public administration in a country. how are employees selected in a public administrative system? what are the features of bureaucracy? classify the bureaucracy in india and explain.

what are the measures taken for administrative reforms in india? prepare a note. how is e - governance helpful to the public? right to information and right to service helps to make public administration popular. substantiate this statement. list out the steps taken to prevent corruption in administration in india?

a day in january, 1907 : it was on that day the wedding ofa day in january, 1907 : it was on that day the wedding ofa day in january, 1907 : it was on that day the wedding ofa day in january, 1907 : it was on that day the wedding ofa day in january, 1907 : it was on that day the wedding of gangul ' s daughter was solemnized. gangul was a farmergangul ' s daughter was solemnized. gangul was a farmergangul ' s daughter was solemnized. gangul was a farmergangul ' s daughter was solemnized. gangul was a farmergangul ' s daughter was solemnized. gangul was a farmer

from a village near calcutta. a lot of guests gather ed in thefrom a village near calcutta. a lot of guests gather ed in thefrom a village near calcutta. a lot of guests gather ed in thefrom a village near calcutta. a lot of guests gather ed in thefrom a village near calcutta. a lot of guests gather ed in the

marriage. they all were received by offering sweets. but themarriage. they all were received by offering sweets. but themarriage. they all were received by offering sweets. but themarriage. they all were received by offering sweets. but themarriage. they all were received by offering sweets. but the sweets were without sugar! instead, it contained jaggery. sweets were without sugar! instead, it contained jaggery. sweets were without sugar! instead, it contained jaggery. sweets were without sugar! instead, it contained jaggery. sweets were without sugar! instead, it contained jaggery.

when someone asked about it, gangul responded with pride, when someone asked about it, gangul responded with pride, when someone asked about it, gangul responded with pride, when someone asked about it, gangul responded with pride, when someone asked about it, gangul responded with pride, " the british are responsible for all our miseries. hadn ' t we " the british are responsible for all our miseries. hadn ' t we " the british are responsible for all our miseries. hadn ' t we " the british are responsible for all our miseries. hadn ' t we " the british are responsible for all our miseries. had n ' t we

decided to boycott their products? so i preferred indiandecided to boycott their products? so i preferred indiandecided to boycott their products? so i preferred indiandecided to boycott their products? so i preferred indiandecided to boycott their products? so i preferred indian jaggery to british sugar ". jaggery to british sugar ". jaggery to british sugar ". jaggery to british sugar ". jaggery to british sugar ". what could be the reason for the people to boycott the british products? in what ways did the british rule affect the indians? how did they respond to the

british rule? let ' s examine them. in the previous classes we have discussed the establishment of the british rule by subjugating princely states. the british conquered princely states using military forces, and diplomatic strategies. it was during the span of one hundred years, between the battle of plassey in 1757 and the first war of indian independence in 1857, that a major part of india came under the british rule ( see the map ). around 63 % of the regions in the indian subcontinent had come under the direct control of the british. the rest of the regions were

ruled by the native kings who had been subjugated to the british. nt - 451 - 3 - maths - 7 - m - vol. 1 nt - 479 - 3 - soc. sci - i - 10 - e - vol. 1 british exploitation and resistance 66 impact of the british policies farmers were one of the immediate victims of the british rule. it was the land revenue system implemented by the british that destroyed the backbone of the farmers. the aim of their tax policy was to maximize the income. the land revenue system implemented in various regions under the british rule was different. the following table shows the british land revenue systems in india.

land revenue regionssystem permanent land bengal, bihar and revenue settlement orissa regions ryotwari system south indian regions mahalwari system north west regions x british exploitation and resistance 67 features of permanent land revenue settlement : in the permanent land revenue settlement the tax was collected by zamindars. zamindar was the owner of the entire land where he had the jurisdiction to collect tax. while the zamindars became the owners of the land, the actual farmers became tenants. farmers were to pay up to 60 % of the yield as tax.

tax was to be paid even at the time of poor yield. the tax was to be paid in cash strictly before the cut - off date. ( before introducing this system, tax could be paid in kind ). lord convalis british governor general introduced this system. in the ryotwari system introduced in south india, the land revenue was collected directly from the farmers ( ryots ). though ownership of land was vested with the farmers, excessive tax impoverished them. furthermore, the tax rates were frequently increased. in the mahalwari system, the village headman was assigned the responsibility

to collect tax. the tax rate was excessive in this system too. the entire village ( mahal ) was considered as a single unit for tax collection. prepare diagram that depicts the features of the permanent settlement, the ryotwari, and the mahalwari land revenue systems. the land revenue policies implemented by the british affected the agricultural sector. when they were unable to pay tax in the form of money before the deadline, they had to take loan from moneylenders at a high rate of interest. the loans were obtained by mortgaging

agricultural land. the agricultural land of the farmers, who could not pay back the loan and interest, was seized by the money lenders. how did the british land revenue policy make the peasantry fall easy prey to the exploitation of moneylenders? explain british exploitation and resistance 68 commercialization of agriculture traditionally the peasants in india were engaged in agriculture mainly to produce things only to meet the needs of their family and the village. during the british rule they were compelled to cultivate crops

according to the market needs. as a result, commercial crops were largely cultivated instead of food crops. this transformation is termed as commercialization of agriculture. we have seen that farmers had to pay high rate of tax in the form of cash before the deadline. to meet this, they cultivated the crops that had higher market price. the products that had demand in the european markets were given higher price. thus, the indian lands became the cultivating field of europe. from the table below, identify the major crops that were widely cultivated in that period. crops region

indigo bengal, bihar cotton maharashtra, punjab sugar cane uttar pradesh tea assam, kerala jute bengal wheat punjab indigo revolt indigo had high price in the market during that period. it was used for dyeing, for, no artificial colours were used then. with the industrial revolution in the 18th century in england, textile industry gathered much momentum and the demand for indigo further increased. it was necessary for the british industrialists to get indigo plantation spread to more regions in india. they gave the farmers a good amount

conduct a discussion on ' british policies and commercialization of agriculture ' x british exploitation and resistance 69 harvesting indigo indigo factory - an illustration collecting indigo - an illustration as advance for the cultivation of indigo. the farmers succumbed to the temptation of the company owners and widely planted indigo as they were in trouble with no other means to pay the heavy land tax. each farmer who accepted the advance amount from the british was liable to plant indigo in a fixed portion of his land. the farmers were also

compelled to cultivate it at the most fertile part of the agricultural land. so the land used for the cultivation of food grains was to be reserved for indigo plantation. due to the interference of the british agents in the harvesting season, the farmers received only a lower price for indigo. later when artificial colours were invented, indigo became obsolete. this made the plight of the farmers more miserable, for they had used much of their land for indigo cultivation. imagine yourself as a journalist. prepare a news report on the plight of the indigo farmers of the nineteenth century.

british exploitation and resistance 70 in 1859 the farmers of bengal organized themselves and declared that they were giving up indigo cultivation. they attacked indigo factories with bows, arrows, swords and spears. several women also participated in the revolt. the rioters excommunicated the british supporters and those who worked for the british. hearing the news, several educated people from calcutta reached the revolt areas and extended their support. the revolt had a strong effect on the government. the government immediately appointed a commission

to study the problems of the indigo farmers. the commission found that the indigo farming was uneconomic and proposed to stop it. analyse the circumstances that led to the indigo revolt. peasant revolts in kerala british malabar witnessed many peasant struggles. it was the exploitation and suppression of the landlords and the british that led to the revolt in malabar. the british treated the janmis ( landlords ) as owners of the land. the revolt was against the atrocities of the landlords including eviction of tenants. such atrocities were carried out with the support of the british.

farmers of south malabar were tenants who cultivated the land obtained on lease from landlords. most of these tenants were mappilas ( muslims in malabar are known as mappilas ). so these struggles that happened in the nineteenth century are known as the mappila rebellions. conolly during mappila riots, the insurgents murdered conolly, the then district magistrate of malabar, at his residence in west hill, calicut. x british exploitation and resistance 71 around twenty two peasant revolts took place in malabar. to suppress

these revolts the british raised a special armed police battalion named malabar special police ( msp ). to enquire about the frequent revolts, the british government appointed william logan commission. the commission pointed out that the cause of the struggle was the unfair land revenue system of the british. struggles storms jungles the santhal is a tribe inhabiting the valleys of rajmahal hills, stretching across the present bengal, jharkhand, and bihar. they lived closely with nature and earned a living by farming and collecting forest produce. they were sturdy and

hardworking, and had their own unique culture. the rhythm of their life was disturbed with the establishment of the british rule. zamindars and moneylenders captured their land. the british officers made them work as slaves in laying railway lines. when their life became unbearable, they decided to take up arms against the british under the leadership of sido and kanhu. the rajmahal hills became a battle field against the british. the british were shocked at their fighting spirit. but the santhals could not keep it going for long. thousands of santhals were killed in the struggle.

the above description is about the resistance of the santhals against the british in 1855. the tribes became the victims of the british rule. gathering forest produce, cattle rearing, shifting cultivation, and hunting were their major means of livelihood. the forest acts imposed by the british made their life miserable. the postal stamp issued by govt of india to honour sido and kanhu, who led the santhal rebellion santhal village - an illustration british exploitation and resistance 72 they were prohibited to enter forest when the british declared forests

as protected. the forests that were abundant with trees required by the british were declared as protected forests. the british widely felled trees from forests to lay railway lines and build ships, and for plantation. the british levied tax at higher rates on the forest produce collected by the tribes. these situations led the tribes to fight against the british. how did the british rule make the tribal life miserable. examine? kurichya revolt kurichiya revolt was another tribal insurgency against the british. it was organized by the kurichya and the kurumba tribes of wayanad in 1812.

let ' s examine the reasons of this revolt. imposition of excessive tax by the british compulsion for paying tax in cash seizing of agricultural land for nonpayment of tax the revolt was led by the kurichya leader rama nambi. several people other than the tribes also joined the struggle. the british government suppressed the struggle and killed rama nambi. t h baber, the then sub collector of thalssery recorded : " if the rioters could resist one more month, they could control the entire state ". besides the santhal and the kurichya revolts, several other tribal

insurgencies broke out in different parts of india. the important among them are : pahariya rebellion bhil rebellion kol rebellion munda rebellion khasi rebellion listen to the words of k suresh singh, a historian, about the tribal struggles in india. " the anti - british struggles of illiterate tribal communities were more aggressive, intense and continuous than any other sects including peasants. " x british exploitation and resistance 73 present a skit based on the tribal rebellion in wayanad

" the misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of " the misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of " the misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of " the misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of " the misery hardly finds a parallel in the history of commerce. the bones of the cotton weavers arecommerce. the bones of the cotton weavers arecommerce. the bones of the cotton weavers arecommerce. the bones of the cotton weavers arecommerce. the bones of the cotton weavers are

bleaching the plains of india " bleaching the plains of india " bleaching the plains of india " bleaching the plains of india " bleaching the plains of india " william bentinck ( 1834 - 35 ) the extract given above is the observation made by william bentinck, the governor general of india, on the decline of textile industry that was world famous once. the british policies completely ruined not only the agricultural sector, but also the handicrafts in india. let ' s examine the causes for their decline. large scale import of machine - made british textiles was the major reason for the ruin of indian textile

industry. the machine - made textiles imported from britain could be sold easily, for they were cheap. the expansion of railway was also responsible for the decline of the indian textile industry. it helped the british to carry the imported fabrics from port towns to interior villages and the cotton collected from villages to the ports for exporting to britain. thus indian weavers lost their business in village market too. due to the higher tax levied, the price of indian textiles exported to britain increased. so it lost the british market too.

the british officers forced the weavers to work at meagre wages and to exchange the products to them at cheaper rate. weavers gave up their work massively due to the exploitation and torture of the british officers. so they searched for other jobs. decline of traditional industries the train during the british period british exploitation and resistance 74 village industries cause of decline pottery import of aluminum vessels tanning export of raw leather to europe carpentry use of machines made of metals analyse the reasons for the decline of the indian textile industry

and complete the diagram below. export of raw materials decline of indian textile industry the immediate reflection of the decline of the textile industry was found in urban areas. the textile centers like murshidabad and dhaka that were thickly populated once, became least inhabited. the people, who had been working in textile industry, migrated to villages and engaged in agriculture related works. as a result the number of people, who engaged in agriculture to earn a living, increased. it fragmented the agricultural fields and the production be fell to be

stagnant. the state of handicrafts in villages was not different. observe the following table. the ruins of agriculture sector and handicraft industry led india to famine and deaths due to starvation. lakhs of people died of famine. the advent of modern industries and the plight of the workers british industrialists started modern industries in india in the nineteenth century. but their number was limited. the plantation industry was the first among them. later, industries like textile, jute, steel, and paper were established. the labourers in these industries x

british exploitation and resistance 75 were exploited. their condition was extremely pathetic. the following were the major problems faced by them. prolonged working hours meagre wages unhealthy accommodation there was no trade union in india at that time. however, the workers agitated whenever they suffered extreme exploitation. great bombay textile strike and calcutta jute mill strike are examples for such agitations. we have discussed the suffering of different sections of people and their agitations against the british rule

as a result of the economic exploitation of the british. these agitations were limited to the respective regions and were not well organised. but in the second half of the nineteenth century, different sections of oppressed people mobilized against the british and launched organized agitations. prepare a digital magazine by collecting the news clippings and pictures of resistance of different sections of people against the british rule in india. life of the working class the indian working class who does not have enough food to sustain and who lead a beastly life in a totally

unhygienic surroundings is someone who is exploited to the maximum in the industrial capital world. jurgen kuczynski ( german economic historian ) prepare an article on the problems faced by different sections of people due to the british policies in india. dawn of 11 may 1857 people of delhi woke up to a tumult. thousands of armed rioters were reaching delhi from meerut crossing the river yamuna. the rioters included sepoys ( indian soldiers ) and common people. in the previous night, they had assassinated some british officers

and set fire to their offices. they declared the mughal emperor bahadur shah ii as the emperor of india. soon the riot spread to other parts of north india. the above description is about the revolt of 1857. historians termed the revolt as india ' s fist war of independence. the rebellion was started by the sepoys of meerut. what led them to the riot? poor salary and abuse by the british officers were the major reasons for their resentment. the rumour that the cartridge in the newly first war of indian independence, 1857 british exploitation and resistance 76 prepare and present the

profiles of the leaders of the first war of indian independence supplied enfield rifles were greased with the fat of cows and pigs provoked them. it wounded the religious sentiments of the hindu and muslim soldiers. the soldiers who were unwilling to use the new cartridges were punished by the officers. in barrackpore in bengal, mangal pandey, an indian soldier, shot at a british officer, who forced him to use the new cartridge. he was arrested and hanged to death. people from all walks of life including kings, farmers, craftsmen, etc took part in the rebellion.

the british rule had adversely affected the kings too. in addition to the doctrine of lapse, the princely states were convicted of inefficient rule and were annexed by the british. this made the kings to lead the rebellion. mangal pandey discuss the causes of the revolt of 1857 based on the hints below. miseries of farmers poverty of the craftsmen dissatisfaction of kings miseries of the sepoys along with the kings and the sepoys, common people also took part in the revolt. they attacked the british and moneylenders and set fire to their account books, deeds and

documents of transactions. the salient feature of this rebellion was the active participation of the common people like farmers and craftsmen. out of one and a half lakhs of people who were killed in the riots at awadh, a princely state, one lakh were the common people. the real strength of the rebellion was the hindu - muslim unity. a spirit of co - operation existed among the soldiers, common people and the leaders. the rioters captured delhi and declared bahadur sha ii as the emperor of india. the table below shows the major centers of the revolt and the leaders. thantia thopi

begum huzret mahal bahadur sha ii rani lakshmi bai x british exploitation and resistance 77 the rioters could not overcome the superior military power of the british and the rebellion was completely suppressed. though the revolt could not succeed completely, it was marked as the foremost massive resistance of the indians against the british. it brought about several changes in the policies and administration of the british. the british parliament took over india from the british east india company. however, the economic exploitation of the british reached its

extreme level in the post - 1857 phase. it is evident in the starvation deaths at that time. in the second half of the nineteenth century, around two crores of people died spread over twenty four great famines. realising the exploitation the economic exploitation of the british created an anti - british feeling among different sections of people. this attitude was a major factor that led to the emergence of indian nationalism in the ninteenth century. nationalism is the sense of unity among the people of a country irrespective of caste, creed, religion and region. indian

national congress was an example for such an organised form of nationalism. indian national congress was formed in december, 1885 in bombay. seventy two delegates from different parts of india attended its first session. the indian centres of revolt leaders delhi bahadur shah ii jhansi rani lakshmi bai lucknow begum hazret mahal kanpur nana saheb, thantia thopi faizabad maulavi ahammedullah nana saheb the picture of famine victims in bengal dadabai naoroji british exploitation and resistance 78 national congress led the anti - british struggle from 1885

till india attained independence in 1947. dadabai naoroji was the person who studied about the facts on the determination of indian economy under the british rule. the drain of wealth to england was the root cause of poverty and starvation in india based on the study he put forward ' drain theory ' and said that how did the indian wealth flow to britain? export of indian raw materials salary and pension to the british officers in india profit gained through the sale of the british products in india tax from india the earlier leaders like dadabai naoroji, romesh chandra dutt

and gopal krishna gokhale had a pivotal role in making the common people aware of the economic policy of the british that impoverished india. the common people realized that the poverty and exploitation they faced had been the creation of the british. it reinforced their anti - british attitude. the nationalism, grown out of such awareness, is termed by some historians, as ' economic nationalism ' prepare a note on drain theory. romesh chandra dutt gopal krishna gokhale nursery of indian national movement majority of the earlier leaders of indian national movement were bengalis. so bengal

was called the nursery of indian national movement. lord curson divided bengal in 1905 to weaken the indian national movement. swadeshi movement : new method of resistance to check economic drain, the early national leaders pleaded with the people to boycott foreign goods and strengthen indian industry by consuming indian products. the major strategy adopted for the anti - partition movement in bengal in 1905 was the boycott of foreign goods and consumption of indigenous products. as part of the agitation, foreign goods were collected and burnt publicly.

the extensive use of indigenous products by discarding foreign items rejuvenated indian industry. as a result, a number of textile mills, x british exploitation and resistance 79 soap factories, matchbox companies, national banks, and insurance companies were established. it was during the swadeshi movement, that the bengal chemical store in bengal, the tata iron and steel plant in maharashtra and the swadeshi steam navigation company in tamil nadu, were established. import of british goods to india steadily went down during this period.

participation of women, labourers, and students were another remarkable feature of this movement. washermen avow that they would not wash foreign cloths. the priests swore that they would not perform rituals and prayers using foreign items. woman boycotted foreign bangles and utensils. students quit these schools to take part in the movement. indian nationalism attained further strength from swadeshi movement. the leaders like bala gangadara tilak, lala lajpat ray, and bipin chandra pal emphasized the necessity of overthrowing the

foreign rule. these leaders were together known as lal - bal - pal. " freedom is my birth right. i shall have it " - this proclamation of bal gangadhar tilak inspired the national movement. we have seen how the protest of people against the british policy that exploited and impoverished indians attained an organised form. it was these protests that were transformed as indian nationalism. boycott of foreign goods and consumption of indigenous goods acted as a powerful weapon in the anti - british movement. later gandhiji made this movement strong and popular. the tamil helmsman

v. o. chidambaran pillai who led the swadeshi movement in tamilnadu established swedeshi steam navigation company in tuticorin in 1906. so he is called the ' helmsman of tamilnadu ' ( kapplottiya tamizhan ). the initial capital of six lakh rupees to start the company was collected from local traders. bala gangadara tilak lala lajpat ray bipin chandra pal british exploitation and resistance 80 prepare a blog on the theme ' british exploitation and resistance ' indigo revolt mappila rebellion santhal rebellion kurichya rebellion emergence of nationalism british exploitation and resistance

decline of village industries swadeshi movement decline of textile industry earlier national leaders drain theory permanent settlement ryotwari system mahalwari system land revenue system poverty of industrial labourers causes the revolt of 1857 conduct a seminar on ' how the economic exploitation of the british caused the emergence of nationalism. ' x british exploitation and resistance 81 what were the circumstances that led to the commercialization of agriculture during the british period? analyze the causes of the indigo revolt

' kurichya rebellion was a resistance by the tribes against the british exploitation '. what were the circumstances that led to the kurichya rebellion? what were the causes of the decline of the indian textile industry? do you think that the famines in india were the creation of the british? why? evaluate the role of drain theory by dadabhai naoroji in stimulating national feeling among the indian masses. analyzes the causes of the revolt of 1857 what were the sources of economic drain from india to britain? do you think that the swadeshi movement was a mass movement? why? ab

santhal rebellion mappila rebellion kurichya rebellion drain theory malabar dadabhai naoroji rajmahal hills wayanad ' the revenue policy of the british was the major cause for the decline of agricultural sector in india '. examine this statement by analysing the features of the permanent settlement. match column a with column b british exploitation and resistance 82 collect news and pictures on peasant and tribal rebellions that took place in different parts of india during the british rule and prepare an album.

prepare a magazine featuring the centres and leaders of the first war of indian independence in 1857. the observations of jawaharlal nehru clearly reflect the unity in diversity existing in india. as a nation, unity in diversity is the solid foundation of india. several factors contributed to the formation of indian nationalism. culture and nationalism 84 nationalism is the sense of unity that exists among the people of a nation irrespective of caste, creed, region and religion. we have already discussed how economic exploitation of the british aroused

nationalism among the indians. similarly, radical changes in social and cultural spheres helped to cherish nationalism among the people. in this unit, we discuss the various socio - cultural factors that reinforced nationalism in india. the nineteenth century india witnessed two types of protests in ideological and cultural spheres. socio - cultural activities and agitations at various levels positively influenced social life, the press, education, literature, art, etc. the consequent changes in these fields paved the way for national unity in india. colonial rule and nationalism

the british colonialists realized the fact that an in - depth understanding of the socio - cultural life of the indians was essential to strengthen their rule. they learned about indian society from the works in sanskrit and persian and by translating them. they established several institutions to study more about india, to interfere in indian education system, and to train their own officers. some of these institutions are : 1 protest against inequality, violations of rights and social evils which existed in the indian society. 2 protest against the economic exploitations of the colonial forces

institution founder asiatic society of bengal william jones calcutta madrasah warren hastings banaras sanskrit college jonathan duncan x culture and nationalism 85 asiatic society of bengal - an illustration this is the statement made by lord macaulay when english education was introduced in india in 1835. can you find out the objectives of english education in india from his statement? to prepare a generation that favours english life styles by the 19th century, english culture and ideologies began to intrude into indian society.

some indian leaders found it necessary to resist this cultural invasion. most of them were english educated indians who internalized the concepts like democracy, liberty, rationalism, equality, scientific temper, socialism, civil rights, etc. they ventured to reform the social customs and rituals prevailed in the country, thereby to defend the invasion of english culture. they tried to reform indian society, language, art and literature. it motivated to protest against inequalities and violation of rights and created a sense of unity among the people.

did the british rule lead to the growth of indian nationalism? evaluate. later, the british rulers realised that it was not possible to know india well through these efforts alone. to ensure commercial growth, the british thinkers who favoured free trade argued for strong british intervention in indian society. but, it was not possible to bring about reforms without popular support. hence, they started english education to nurture a fraction of indian society that would support britain. scientific societies in the nineteenth century, many scientific societies were formed in india for

translating science books, holding discussions and popularizing scientific temper. 1825 - calcutta - society for translating european sciences 1838 - calcutta - society for acquiring general knowledge 1876 - indian association, bengal, founded by mahendra lal sarkar 1861 : banaras - banaras samvad club 1864 : aligarh : aligarh scientific society founded by sir syed ahmad khan 1868 : bihar : bihar scientific society culture and nationalism 86 social reforms liberal outlook, passion for modernization and rationalism nurtured

in indian society in the 19th century paved the way for the emergence of various social reform movements. they had two main objectives : to eradicate evils and superstitions that existed in the indian society. to ensure equal civil rights to education, travel and dress code the socio - economic situation in india was not favourable to achieve these goals. so the reformers aimed at bringing about fundamental changes in the society. for this, they advanced the following proposals : eradicate caste system protect the rights of all eliminate discrimination against women

provide education to all promote widow remarriage abolish child marriage and eliminate the supremacy of the clergy raja rammohun roy was the pioneer among the social reformers who strived for the modernisation of indian society. he opposed caste system and ' sati ', social evils prevailed in the indian society and established the brahma samaj in bengal. he propagated the idea of a unified indian society in the place of a society fragmented over caste lines. this idea prompted patriotism among the people. thus, the concept of a unified nation became one

of the objectives of social reform. to improve the status of women, he advocated for the right of women to own property. taking cue from his ideologies, many leaders from various parts of india ventured to reform the society. in bengal, ishwar chandra vidyasagar argued for remarriage of widows. as a result, the british government passed the hindu widow raja rammohun roy ishwar chandra vidyasagar x culture and nationalism 87 remarriage act in 1856. he established educational institutions for women education. such centres for women education were

founded in other parts of the country. sarada sadan in bombay established by padita ramabai was one of the important institutions among them. the major social reform movements in this period and their leaders are given in the table below. pandita ramabai movements reformers ideologies arya samaj swami dayanand saraswati campaigned against idol worship and child marriage. ramakrishna mission swami vivekananda opposed caste system and social evils. propagated the concepts of liberty, equality and freedom of thought.

aligarh movement sir syed ahmad khan advocated for social and educational uplift of indian muslims. prarthana samaj atmaram pandurang campaigned for inter dining, inter caste marriage, widow remarriage and the uplift of women and backward calsses. theosophical society annie besant resurgence of hindu religion. hitakarini samaj viresalingam campaigned for widow remarriage and women education. satya shodak samaj jyotiba phule opposed social evils and domination of priests. started educational institutions for backward classes.

self respect movement e. v. ramaswami naicker opposed brahmanical supremacy and caste system. sree narayana dharma sree narayana guru opposed caste system and paripalanayogam evil practices. advocated for social and economic progress of the backward classes. culture and nationalism 88 prepare a digital poster including the table depicting indian social reformers and their movements. as a result of the activities of the social reformers and their movements, the british were forced to abolish many social evils that existed in various parts of the country. they are as follows :

" an indian citizen has lost his naturalness. his lifeblood has dried up. he is half starved and half dressed. no delicious food is available to him. his dress is ragged and torn. his condition is very pathetic ". how did the ideologies put forward by indian reform movements create nationalism among indians? discuss on the basis of the hints given : opposition to caste system advocating for equal rights defending the intrusion of foreign ideas and culture protest against social evils educational development protest against the discriminations imposed upon women.

the press and unity of india x culture and nationalism 89 this is a news item that appeared in sulabh samachar, an earlier newspaper from bengal. this news covers the plight of the indians under the british rule. the newspapers in that period reported many such issues in the society. let us see what did the newspapers do during freedom movement. examine the role of newspapers in making people aware of exploitation and violation of rights they faced. culture and nationalism 90 indian leaders mostly depended on newspapers to propagate their

nationalistic ideologies. they considered journalism as a social service. their newspapers criticized the british policies and motivated national movement. raja rammohan roy was the first to start newspaper with a national perspective. his sambad kaumudi in bengali and mirat - ul - akbar in persian focused on social reformation, democracy and nationalism. following his path, many reformers and national leaders published newspapers in regional languages. realising the power of the press, the british imposed stringent measures to control them. the vernacular press act enacted by lord

lytton in 1878 was one of them. it curbed freedom of press in regional languages. the british withdrew the act after a massive protest. find out the names of malayalam newspapers published during the time of independence movement and list them. major newspapers during the freedom struggle and their leaders the hindu, swadeshi mitram g. subrahmania iyer amrit bazar patrika sisir kumar ghosh, motilal ghosh bombay samachar fardourji marsban kesari, maratha bal gangadhar tilak bengali surendranath banerji voice of india dadabhai naoroji

shome prakash ishwar chandra vidyasagar new india, common wheel annie besant young india, harijan mahatma gandhi al hilal maulana abul kalam azad vandematharam lala lajpat rai nation gopalakrishna gokhale newspapers leaders x culture and nationalism 91 during those days, protection, circulation and reading newspapers were considered to be a part of freedom struggle. fergussan college in pune established by deccan education society. emblem of deccan education society prepare a speech on the role of the press in fostering national unity and social reformation in india.

education for the nation these are the visions of various social reformers on the importance and necessity of education. identify the role of education from these observations. to bring about changes in society. to maintain unity. establishing national educational institutions was the main means adopted for inculcating nationalism. they imparted secular education to all sections of the society. the deccan education soceity founded in 1884 in pune by g. g. agarkar, bal gangadhar tilak and mahadev govinda ranade was one of such educational institutions

established with a nationalistic perspective. the founders were well aware that education was inevitable in the socio - economic and cultural progress of the country. culture and nationalism 92 statue of d. k. karve gandhiji and tagore at visva bharati kerala kalamandalam jamia millia islamia gandhiji in wardha educational conference the swadeshi movement which started after the partition of bengal in 1905 influenced to found many educational institutions for the propagation of national education. d. k. karve started the first indian women university in maharashtra in 1916. he

was motivated by the concept that education had a pivotal role in women empowerment. following this many educational institutions were founded in various parts of india. their major objectives were promotion of nationalism, opposition to social evils, and rejection of western education. visva bharati, the university founded by rabindranath tagore in bengal, focused on universal brotherhood. with this university, tagore aimed at a system of education that would bridge western and eastern cultures. similarly, when the national movement became strong under the leadership of

mahatma gandhi, a team led by maulana mohamed ali, shoukath ali, dr. zakir husain and m. a. ansari founded the jamia millia islamia in aligarh. its objective was to strengthen national movement through secular education. intrusion of western arts and education ruined indian traditional arts. many initiatives were taken to defend the cultural invasion and promote traditional art. kerala kalamandalam in the cheruthuruthy village of thrissur, founded by mahakavi vallathol narayana menon was one of such initiatives. in 1937, mahatma gandhi proposed a special

education plan. this is called wardha education plan. its major objective was vocational education. he thought that vocational training during education would help build up a good future. gandhiji believed that such a generation could defend the british. x culture and nationalism 93 nai talim gandhiji proposed that education should be related to some productive occupation. he recommended free and compulsory education in mother tongue for all children between 8 and 14 years. this perspective of education is known as nai talim ( new education ).

in 1937, the wardha conference of the indian national congress appointed a committee headed by dr. zakir husain to study this system of education. following are some ideas envisioned in national education. read carefully. list the institutions that worked for materializing these ideas. secularism nationalism women empowerment internationalism revival of traditional arts protest against foreign rule and caste system ideas of national institutionseducation how did the advancement in education help nurture indian nationalism? literature and nationalism

the protest against the british rule as well as social evils existed in the indian society reflected in indian literature. writers in various parts of india illustrated the agonies and atrocities faced by the people the readers in other parts experienced these sorrows as theirs and ventured to fight them collectively. writers shared their resentments with the people through bankim chandra culture and nationalism 94 poetry, tales, novel, drama, etc. this developed among the people a sense of patriotism and dissent towards the foreign

dominance. patriotic songs in regional languages bridged the gap between the upper class literates and the illiterate mass. the concept of bharat mata was first presented in pubic through a play written by sisir kumar ghosh, and satyendranath tagore. bankim chandra chatterji, a famous bengali writer adopted novel, a western form of literature, as a medium to portray the plight of indian society. of his novels, the most notable is anandamath, based on the sanyasi revolt of bengali peasants. he could well illustrate the agonies of

bengali farmers and disparity between rich and poor in the bengali society. thus, indian society came to know about the predicaments of the bengalis. the song ' bandemataram ' is taken from this novel. nil darpan, a play written by the bengali writer dinabandhu mitra, depicted the severe exploitation suffered by the indigo farmers in bengal. it was staged in many places and greatly influenced the people. indian association, a political movement floated by surendranath banerjee, campaigned for the welfare of the bengali farmers taking cue from the issues depicted in

nil darpan. this play triggered farmers ' unrests in various parts of the country. urdu poet allama muhammad iqbal, who penned the famous patriotic song ' sare jahan se accha, hindustan hamara ' praised the beauty of india ' s nature and unity of its people. creative expressions of indian writers helped to inculcate the concept of a unified india among the public. many writers from different languages of india contributed patriotic and nationalistic works to indian literature. how did literature in various languages motivate indian nationalism? discuss. dinabandhu mitra nil darpan

muhammad iqbal x culture and nationalism 95 works authors languages ghora rabindranath tagore bengali gitanjali sevasadan prem chand hindi premasram rangabhumi godan panchalisapadham subrahmanya bharati tamil kali paattu kannan paattu kuyil paattu hayat - e - sahi altaf husain hali urdu hayat e - javeed nibandha mala vishnu krishna marathi chiplunkar ente gurunathan vallathol narayana malayalam bappuji menon indiayude karachil culture and nationalism 96 come friend come forward many poems and songs which strengthened the nationalist

movement were written in malayalam. the most famous among them is " varika varika sahachare " written by amshi narayana pillai. varika varika sahajare - valiya sahana samaramai karalurachu kaikal korthu kalnadayku pokanaam! kanthurannu nokuvin - kaikal korthiranguvin kapadakudila bharanakoodamikshanam thakarka naam! britaine virattuvin - chattamokke mattuvin dhushtaneethivishtapathilottume nilachida! vijayamenkil vijayavum - maranamenkil maranavum bhayaviheenamakhilajanavum aagrahichiranganaam. nationalism in art this is a water colour painting by abanindranath

tagore. it depicts bharat mata giving food, cloth and knowledge to indian masses. this painting helped to inculcate patriotism in indian minds. under the influence of this painting artists from various parts of the country pictured bharat mata in various fashions, embedded with the map of india. abanindranath tagore tried to free indian painting from western style and to promote oriental painting based on indian culture and tradition. for this, he started indian society of oriental arts in calcutta. following the western style, raja ravi varma from kerala

visualized various scenes from indian epics and literature. nandalal bose, another artist portrayed scenes from indian literature and events in history. his famous painting is ' sati ', which visualized the dilemma bharat mata x culture and nationalism 97 sati - a painting of nandalal bose of a woman who was forced to commit sati, a social evil prevailed in india. this painting touched indian hearts and stimulated protest against this social evil. his another painting ' village drummer ' was exhibited in the haripura session of the indian national congress in 1938 and was

adopted as the picture for the poster of the congress. amrita sher - gil, a famous woman artist of india, painted the sufferings of indian villagers in dark shades ably reflecting their predicaments. her paintings also motivated people to think about a unified india. did you notice the pictures? these are the national symbols that helped to nurture nationalism in indian minds. along with these, the national anthem written by rabindranath tagore also helped to create national consciousness. the tricolour flag was first designed during the time of the

swadeshi movement. the earlier version of the flag contained eight lotuses representing eight provinces in british india and a crescent representing hindu - muslim fraternity. the team led by gandhiji designed the national flag with charkha, a domestic cotton spinning wheel used in indian villages. charkha resembled the self dependence of indians and their defiance to colonial rule. the present tricolour flag of india was officially adopted in 1947. you have studied about the national emblem adopted from the lion capital of asoka at saranath. patriotic songs, symbols and pictures were used

throughout our freedom struggle. they played a crucial role in developing nationalist spirit among indians. village drummer - a painting of nandalal bose painting of raja ravi varma - a scene from sakuntahalam of kalidasa nt - 451 - 4 - maths - 7 - m - vol. 1 nt - 479 - 4 - soc. sci - i - 10 - e - vol. 1 culture and nationalism 98 prepare an essay on the factors that contributed to the emergence of indian nationalism. national flag and national emblem prepare a digital album consisting of art forms, national symbols and personalities which promoted nationalism madame cama and tricolour flag

madame bhikaji cama is one of the bold women fighters of indian freedom struggle. she was the first person to hoist indian tricolour flag in an international forum. she hoisted the flag in the conference of the second international held in stuttgart, germany, in 1907. though indian nationalism emerged in the 19th century, indians had the concept of a nation even before the beginning of the national movement. they wished to implement their visions of modernization on the soil under their sovereignty. the passion of indian society for freedom, equality and

sovereignty were reflected in the art, literature, education, journalism and social reform and it motivated indian nationalism. village life - a painting of amrita sher - gil x culture and nationalism 99 culture and nationalism social reform movements newspapers education literature art opposed the social evils and superstitions advocated for modernization of indian society propagated the nature of british exploitation in india formed indigenous education system to combat the foreign rule contributed works depicting predicaments of the people of india in various fields visualized the

plight of the people of india. drew paintings viewing india as one nation ' indian nationalism was a form of protest against and dissent to the british colonialism '. substantiate the newspapers have a major role in unifying the people of a country. evaluate the significance of this statement in indian context. evaluate how changes in education influenced the emergence of indian nationalism. identify the correlation between the items in section a and complete section b in the same way. i. a ) vallathol narayana menon : malayalam b ) altaf husain hali :.

ii. a ) bharath mata : abanindranath tagore b ) sati :. iii. a ) anandamath : novel b ) nil darpan :. iv. a ) arya samaj : swami dayananda saraswati b ) rama krishna mission :. culture and nationalism 100 prepare a magazine collecting literary works and newspapers and pictures that contributed to the national unity of india. prepare a magazine collecting malayalam poems that ignited nationalism. the stain of indigothe stain of indigothe stain of indigothe stain of indigothe stain of indigo i must confess that i did not then know even the name, much less

the geographical position, of champaran and i had hardly any notion of indigo plantations. i had seen packets of indigo, but little dreamed that it was grown and manufactured in champaran at great hardship to thousands of agriculturists. rajkumar shukla was one of the agriculturists who had been under this harrow and he was filled with a passion to wash away the stain of indigo for the thousands who were suffering as he had suffered. this man caught hold of me at lucknow where i had gone for the congress of 1916 brij babu kishore prasad moved a resolution expressing

sympathy for the people of champaran and it was unanimously passed. rajkumar followed me to cawnpore and ashram. finally i told him i have to be in calcutta and from there take me to champaran. my experiments with truth - mahatma gandhi through these words in his autobiography, gandhiji details the circumstances that made him participate in the indigo farmers ' protest at champaran in bihar in 1917. he started his social activities in india intervening in the problems faced by the indigo farmers in champaran. soon he could gain the trust and recognition of the common people of india.

let us see the reasons for this ; the agitations he conducted in south africa his life style as a common man ( food, clothing, language ) methods of struggle based on non violence. they found in gandhiji a saviour, who could solve their problems. struggle and freedom 102 early struggles of mahatma gandhi given below are some of the regional struggles in which gandhiji was involved after returning to india from south africa : gandhiji and south africa gandhiji reached south africa as an advocate of an industrialist named dada abdulla from gujarat. as he was travelling from durban to

pritoria, he was pushed out of the first class compartment saying that he had no right to travel along with the british. within no time he came to know the intensity of the racial discrimination experienced by the indians in south africa. he stayed for 21 years in south africa and all this time he was trying to solve the problems of the non - europeans in south africa. gandhiji addressing the public struggle area year the struggle of indigo farmers in champaran bihar 1917 ahmedabad cotton mill strike gujarat 1918 peasant struggle in kheda gujarat 1918

in champaran, gandhiji resorted to disobedience of the british rules and satygraha and his involvement compelled the authorities to pass laws in favour of the indigo farmers. after his struggle in champaran, gandhiji worked for the progress of champaran region by establishing primary schools, initiating medical aids and involving in cleaning activities. cotton mill workers in ahmedabad started their strike in 1918 when they were denied ' plague bonus '. gandhiji got involved in this strike and adopted the same method of protest that he used in champaran.

following his satygraha, the authorities agreed to hike the wages of the employees and the strike came to an end. due to drought and crop failure farmers in kheda were living in utter misery. the rulers decided to collect tax from these poor villagers. x struggle and freedom 103 starting satygraha in ( 1918 ) gandhiji protested against the decision. he advised people not to pay tax. consequently, the authorities were forced to reduce tax rates. his early struggles based on satyagraha and ahimsa made gandhiji a popular leader. let ' s find the results of the early struggles that

gandhiji took up in india. the struggles he took up popularised his ideologies and method of protest. till his entry into the political scenario, national movement was confined to the educated section of the society. his methods of protest attracted the laymen to the movement. the city centric national movement spread to rural areas. gandhiji became a national leader acceptable to all strata of the society. examine the early struggles led by gandhiji and discuss his method of protest. how did gandhiji become the leader of indian society? prepare a documentary based on gandhijis early

struggles and life eight oscar award - winning film ' gandhi ' directed by richard attenborough is a visual depiction of the gandhian period in our freedom struggle. similarly, the movie ' making of mahatma ' by shyam benegal visualises the south african life of gandhiji. apart from these, a number of documentaries and films related to gandhiji had been produced. gandhiji on the screen plague bonus plague outbreak of 1917 in ahmedabad killed 10 % of the city population. during this time, the labourers were given a bonus upto 80 % of their wages to prevent labourers from quitting the

job for fear of plague. this system was helpful for the labourers to survive the inflation due to the first world war. when the plague threat was over, this bonus was withdrawn and the labourers started agitation against it. towards the national movement gandhiji entered indian national movement with his protest against the rowlatt act. in the pretext of preventing extremist activities, the british parliament passed the rowlatt act in 1919 limiting the civil rights. as per this act any person could be arrested and imprisoned without trial. struggle and freedom 104

jallianwala bagh - an illustration the massacre at jallianwala bagh intensified the protests at the national level. gandhiji said : ' ' if the battle of plassey laid the foundation for the british rule, jallianwala bagh shook the foundation. " how did the jallianwala bagh massacre influence indian national movement? discuss. people gathered at jallianwala bagh in amritsar on 13 april, 1919 to protest against the arrest of saifuddin kitchlew and satyapal who led the anti - rowlatt act agitations in punjab. the city was under the control of the army. accusing that the protesters violated his

instructions, the army chief general dyer ordered to shoot without warning. the innocent armless people were trapped as the ground was surrounded by buildings and the only entrance was blocked by the armed british soldiers. as per the british records, the shooting of ten minutes killed 379 protesters. in fact, the death toll was actually double this. jallianwala bagh masscre non - cooperation and the khilafat movements the first national level struggle by the indian national congress under the leadership of mahatma gandhi was the non - cooperation

movement. the confidence gained from the anti - rowlatt protest motivated gandhiji to declare non - cooperation against the british. let ' s see the characteristics of non - cooperation policy adopted by mahatma gandhi. given below are some of the examples of how the indian society responded to gandhiji ' s appeal for non - cooperation. x struggle and freedom 105 charka used by gandhiji - from a collection of sabarmati ashram ali brothers - mohamad ali, shaukath ali farmers in awadh refused to pay taxes. the tribal groups in northern andhra entered the forests and collected the

forest produces violating the forest laws. farmers in uttar pradesh refused to carry the luggage of the colonial officials workers struck work. lawyers boycotted courts. students quitted colleges and schools run by the british. the public, including women, burnt foreign clothes on the streets. in addition to his appeal for non - cooperation, gandhiji motivated the people to participate in constructive programmes. inspired by this, people began to make indigenous products, spin khadi cloth using charka, establish national schools and popularise hindi. kashi vidya pith gujarat

vidya pith, jamia millia, etc. are some of the national educational institutions started during this time. students who boycotted english education were attracted to national educational institutions. during the same period maulana mohamad ali and maulana shoukath ali intensified the activities of the khilafat movement. by declaring the khilafat movement as a part of indian national movement, gandhiji ensured active participation of muslims struggle and freedom 106 in the freedom struggle. he travelled across india with khilafat leaders and propagated his ideologies. as a result :

anti - british feeling spread to the nook and corner of the nation. hindu - muslim unity was intensified gandhiji breaking the salt law - an illustration explain the circumstance that led gandhiji to support the khilafat movement the khilafat movement after the first world war, britain tried to limit the power of khalifa, the ruler of turkey and the spiritual leader of world muslims. the world wide protest against this is called the khilafat movement. in response to the police firing at a mob, at chouri choura in uttar pradesh the villagers set ablaze the police station and 22 policemen

died. this incident disappointed gandhiji. so, he called for stopping the non - cooperation movement. poorna swaraj and civil disobedience the lahore session of the indian national congress held in 1929 under the chairmanship of jawaharlal nehru was a turning point in the history of freedom movement in india. the session declared that the ultimate aim of indian freedom struggle was to attain complete freedom ( poorna swaraj ) for the country it also resolved to start the civil disobedience movement under the leadership of mahatma gandhi.

with the civil disobedience gandhiji meant to disobey all anti - popular and anti - democratic civil laws made by the british government. as a part of this movement, gandhiji proposed the following : x struggle and freedom 107 let ' s examine the reasons why he selected salt as a powerful weapon against the british. salt tax constituted two fifth portion of the income collected by the british through taxes. this tax was a heavy burden for the poor people. the british government banned small scale indigenous salt production. there was three fold hike on salt price.

the demand for lifting salt tax was a slogan suitable to inspire all segments of the society. explaining the strength of the civil disobedience movement he said, " supposing ten persons from each of the seven lakh villages in india come forward to manufacture salt and disobey the salt act, what do you think the government can do? even the worst autocrat you can imagine would not dare to blow regiments of peaceful civil resisters out of a canon ' s mouth. if only you will bestir yourselves just a little, i assure you we shall be able to tire the government out in a very short time. '

gandhiji gandhiji in london how far the demands of gandhiji are appropriate to attain the freedom of india? proposals put forward by gandhiji to lift salt tax to declare 50 % tax relaxation for farmers to increase the tax on imported foreign clothes to release political prisoners to cut short military budget and high salary of top officials to dissolve the secret surveillance wing formed to watch indians to start coastal shipping service to implement prohibition of liquor struggle and freedom 108 inspired by the call of gandhiji, people in various parts

of the country started to produce salt on their own, violating the british regulations. payyannur in kerala, vedaranyam in tamil nadu, bombay in maharashtra, noakhali in bengal and north west frontier province were some of the centres of this protest. as part of the protest, volunteers made salt and distributed it to the public, hoisted national flag and chanted anti - british slogans. the british police severely tortured a team of volunteers led by sarojini naidu who had set out to dharasana salt field in gujarat. gandhiji was arrested and the movement was suppressed callously.

sarojini naidu the salt sathyagraha played a major role in making national movement a mass movement - substantiate. round table conferences the british government convened at james palace in london three round table conferences in 1930, 1931 and 1932 to discuss the administrative reforms to be implemented in india. representing indian national congress gandhiji attended the second round table conference. the british quit india " " here is a mantra, a short one that i give you, you may imprint it on your hearts and let every breath of yours give expression to it. the mantra

is ' do or die ' - we shall either free india or die in the attempt. we shall not live to see the perpetuation of our slavery. ' ' gandhiji this was the call of gandhiji in the conference of the national congress held in bombay in 1942. the quit india movement was the last popular protest organized by the indian national congress under the leadership of gandhiji. x struggle and freedom 109 prepare a digital album including the pictures of the various struggles led by gandhiji in india quit india was yet another popular movement like the civil disobedience movement. it was a mass movement

based on the ideology of non - violence ( ahimsa ) meant to force the british to leave the country offering complete freedom to indians. let us examine some factors that caused quit india movement. reluctance of the british to implement constitutional reforms in india public disgust with price hike and famine the assumption that the british would be defeated in the second world war as part of this movement, gandhiji called for the following : princely states shall recognise the sovereignty of their people farmers shall not pay land tax

government officials shall disclose their loyalty to indian national congress without resigning their positions without quitting their positions in the army, soldiers shall disobey orders to shoot and kill indians if possible, students shall boycott education till attaining freedom mahatma gandhi with moulana abul kalam azad and j. b. kripalani at the quit india conference. ' the quit india movement was a turning point in india ' s freedom struggle ' discuss. conduct a quiz competion on ' gandhiji and the freedom struggle of india. '

the british government suppressed the movement very severely and arrested leaders including mahatma gandhi. in protest, the uncontrolled mob demolished government offices, electric lines and transportation facilities. at the end of 1942, india was under the fire of popular unrest. the quit india movement was a clear indication of the people ' s determination to grab freedom for their country. struggle and freedom 110 alternative paths " to sound the order of retreat just when public enthusiasm was reaching the boiling point was nothing short of a national calamity. the principal

lieutenants of the mahatma, deshabandhu das, pandit motilal nehru and lala lajpat rai, who were all in prison, shared the popular resentment. i was with the deshabandhu at that time and i could see that he was beside himself with anger and sorrow at the way mahatma gandhi was repeatedly bungling. " subhash chandra bose this is how subhash chandra bose responded to gandhiji ' s decision to withdraw the non - cooperation movement following the chauri chaura incident. many such movements and persons who had difference of opinion towards the gandhian

approach to the struggle for independence also played crucial roles in attaining freedom for our country. their objective was also nothing but india ' s freedom from colonial clutches. c. r. das and motilal nehru, who opposed gandhian idea of boycott movement, formed the swaraj party in 1923. they argued for making legislative assemblies as platforms for raising our voices instead of boycotting them and they contested elections. gradually, the opposition to gandhian method of struggle intensified. revolutionaries from punjab, rajasthan, uttar pradesh and bihar gathered in delhi and formed the

hindustan socialist republican association in 1928. bhagat singh, chandra sekhar azad, raj guru and sukh dev were at the helm of this movement. they floated a military wing called ' republican army ' for armed revolution. their plan was to overthrow the colonial government through military action and establish a federal bhagat singh sukh dev raj guru chandra sekhar azad newspaper report on the execution of bhagath singh and his comrades x struggle and freedom 111 republic of indian states. in lahore bhagat singh, raj guru and sukh dev shot to kill saunders, the police

officer who was responsible for the lathi charge that had led to the death of national leader lala lajpat rai. bhagat singh and batukeshwar dutt threw bombs at the central legislative assembly to protest against the attempt to pass laws curtailing civil rights. they were arrested and sent to jail. on march 23, 1931, bhagat singh, raj guru and sukh dev were hanged to death by the british government. given below are the names of some revolutionary organisations and their leaders who dedicated their life to attaining freedom for india. taking cue from the russian revolution,

socialist ideologies started to spread in india in 1930s and these ideas influenced a section of congress activists. jawaharlal nehru, subhash chandra bose, jai prakash narayan and aruna asaf ali led the congress socialist fraction within the indian national congress. at a meeting held under the chairmanship of jai prakash narayan in bombay in 1934, the congress socialist party was formed. this new organisation played a decisive role in the quit india movement. when gandhiji and other top leaders of the congress were arrested, the postal stamp issued by the government of india

honouring aruna asaf ali abhinav bharat society v. d. savarkar anuseelan samithi bareender kumar ghose, pulin bihari das ghadar party lala hardayal indian republican army surya sen struggle and freedom 112 socialist party leaders like jai prakash narayan and aruna asaf ali led the movement from their hideouts. at various stages of the national movement, subhash chandra bose expressed his difference of opinion on gandhian ideas of struggle. quitting the congress he formed a political party called forward bloc. he took the charge of the indian national army ( ina ) formed by rash bihari bose

to attain freedom for india. he formed a provisional government for free india in singapore, with the aim of forcing the british to quit india. the indian national army had a women wing called the jhansi regiment. captain lekshmi, a keralite, was in - charge of this regiment. with the support of the japanese army the indian national army marched to the east west border of india and hoisted indian flag in imphal. jai prakash narayan subhash chandra bose and his cabinet ministers in singapore conduct a seminar on the organisations which were formed

as an alternative to gandhian way of struggle for the freedom of india. movements of workers and peasants the socialist ideology spread among the indians after the russian revolution led to the formation of various labour and peasant movements in india. following are the earliest labour unions in india. ahmedabad textiles association madras labour union in 1920, the all india trade union congress ( aituc ) was formed vanchi iyer vanchi iyer is the first martyr of freedom struggle in south india. he shot thirunelveli district collector robert william descourt ashe, on 17

july, 1911 in maniachi railway station in tamil nadu in retaliation of the collector ' s callous torturing of freedom fighters. iyer committed suicide on the same spot to escape from the british police. praising iyer, madame cama wrote in her publication ' ' vandematharam ' of july 1911 : the shots that vanchi fired did help arouse a slave nation from the century - old slumbering ". x struggle and freedom 113 under the leadership of n. m. joshi and lala lajpat rai. the aituc had three main objectives : to organise and act as a working class.

to facilitate indian working class to cooperate with the working class out side india to participate actively in the indian freedom struggle because of the tax laws of the british, severe exploitation of the zamindars and the low price of agricultural produces, indian farmers realized the importance of an organised struggle and started peasant movements. the all india kisan congress, which was later called the all india kisan sabha, was formed in lahore by the efforts of the leaders like n. g. ranga. a farmers ' manifesto, which included all the

basic demands of indian peasants, was prepared in the all india kisan samiti conference held in bombay. given below are some of the demands included in the manifesto. reduce 50 % of land tax and lease charge write off debts cancel feudal taxes ensure minimum wage for agricultural workers recognise peasant unions organisation of labourers and farmers and their subsequent protests energised indian national movement. their policy of equally opposing the imperialist policies of the british government as well as the feudal system that existed in india triggered agitations and

revolts in various parts of the country. agitations places tebhaga struggle bengal telengana struggle andhra pradesh naval mutiny bombay discuss the role of labourers and farmers in the struggle for indian independence. struggle and freedom 114 towards independence the second world war led to the collapse of imperialism the world over. consequent to financial crisis britain lost its capacity to maintain colonies. intensified freedom struggles in the continents of asia and africa on one hand and american and soviet policy against colonialism on the other, forced

the british to free india from their clutches. the new british government that came to power under the labour party led by clement attlee, sympathiser to india, also expedited our independence from colonial rule. meanwhile, the all india league under the leadership of mohammed ali jinnah raised claims for a separate country called pakistan. following this, lord mountbatten was appointed as the viceroy of india to deliver freedom to india addressing the question of partition. he argued that freedom for india was impossible without partition and to support this

argument he prepared a strategy called " mountbatten plan '. his proposals were as follows : khan abdul ghaffar khan khan abdul gaffar khan was a national leader who strongly opposed the dual nation theory and partition. the partition hurt khan who led countless agitations in the northwest frontiers. this stalwart of indian freedom struggle, who tried his best for hindu - muslim unity, is famously known as frontier gandhi. government of india honoured him with bharat ratna. jawaharlal nehru addressing the public at redfort to form a separate country in muslim majority area as per the muslims

wish. to divide punjab and bengal to conduct a referendum to determine whether to add north west frontier province to pakistan or not to appoint a commission to determine the borders in punjab and bengal while the congress and the all india league approved this plan the nationalists like khan adbul ghaffar khan vehemently opposed it. in x struggle and freedom 115 struggle and freedom regional struggles national struggle alternative paths cotton mill workers ' strike at ahmedabad indigo farmers ' strike at champaran farmers ' strike at kheda civil disobedience movement non - cooperation

movement socialist movementswaraj party revolutionary movements labour unions and peasant movements salt satyagraha dharasan strike quit india movement what are the regional agitations in which gandhiji participated after his arrival in india? what are the strategies of strike used in the peasant struggle in kheda? analyse the outcomes of ghandhiji ' s earlier struggles. prepare a project including the details of leaders and organisations that fought for indian independence. 1947, when the british parliament passed the indian independence act, two free nations - india and pakistan - came

into existence. jawaharlal nehru became the first prime minister of independent india. so far we have discussed how indian freedom struggle became a popular national movement. gandhian ideas played a major role in this process. alternatives to his method of struggle also significantly contributed to our independence. in short, the freedom we attained on 15 august, 1947 is the outcome of indian national movement inspired by various streams of ideas and ideologies. struggle and freedom 116 prepare a short note on the life of gandhiji in south africa.

prepare a digital album of the postal stamps brought out by the government of india or governments of other countries in memory of gandhiji or their pictures. name the law made by the british in the pretext of preventing extremist activities. write a short note on jallianwala bagh massacre. list out the outcomes of the non - cooperation movement under gandhiji. which incident forced gandhiji to withdraw the non - cooperation movement? which session of the congress declared poorna swaraj as the ultimate aim of indian freedom struggle?

prepare a seminar paper on the significance of the civil disobedience movement in the freedom struggle. prepare a note on the quit india movement. x 125 notes • right to freedom of speech and expression. • right to life and liberty. • right to maximum survival and development. • right to be respected and accepted regardless of caste, creed and colour. • right to protection and care against physical, mental and sexual abuse. • right to participation. • protection from child labour and hazardous work. • protection against child marriage. • right to know one ’ s culture and live

accordingly. • protection against neglect. • right to free and compulsory education. • right to learn, rest and leisure. • right to parental and societal care, and protection. major responsibilities • protect school and public facilities. • observe punctuality in learning and activities of the school. • accept and respect school authorities, teachers, parents and fellow students. • readiness to accept and respect others regardless of caste, creed or colour. constitution of india part iv a fundamental duties of citizens article 51 a

fundamental duties - it shall be the duty of every citizen of india : ( a ) to abide by the constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the national flag and the national anthem ; ( b ) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom ; ( c ) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of india ; ( d ) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so ; ( e ) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of india transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional

diversities ; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women ; ( f ) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture ; ( g ) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers, wild life and to have compassion for living creatures ; ( h ) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform ; ( i ) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence ; ( j ) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievements ;

( k ) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between age of six and fourteen years. kerala state commission for protection of child righ ts child helpline - 1098, crime stopper - 1090, nirbhaya - 1800 425 1400 kerala police helpline - 0471 - 3243000 / 44000 / 45000 • right to freedom of speech and expression. • right to life and liberty. • right to maximum survival and development. • right to be respected and accepted regardless of caste, creed and colour. • right to protection and care against physical, mental and sexual abuse.

• right to participation. • protection from child labour and hazardous work. • protection against child marriage. • right to know one ’ s culture and live accordingly. • protection against neglect. • right to free and compulsory education. • right to learn, rest and leisure. • right to parental and societal care, and protection. major responsibilities • protect school and public facilities. • observe punctuality in learning and activities of the school. • accept and respect school authorities, teachers, parents and fellow students. • readiness to accept and respect

others regardless of caste, creed or colour. dear children, wouldn ’ t you like to know about your rights? awareness about your rights will inspire and motivate you to ensure your protection and participation, thereby making social justice a reality. you may know that a commission for child rights is functioning in our state called the kerala state commission for protection of child rights. let ’ s see what your rights are : contact address : children ' s rights fundamental duties - it shall be the duty of every citizen of india : kerala state commission for protection of child righ ts

' sree ganesh ', t. c. 14 / 2036, vanross junction kerala university p. o., thiruvananthapuram - 34, phone : 0471 - 2326603 email : childrights. cpcr @ kerala. gov. in, rte. cpcr @ kerala. gov. in website : www. kescpcr. kerala. gov. in child helpline - 1098, crime stopper - 1090, nirbhaya - 1800 425 1400 kerala police helpline - 0471 - 3243000 / 44000 / 45000 online r. t. e monitoring : www. nireekshana. org. in security features of a genuine indian currency note printing and circulation of forged notes are offences under sections 489a to 489e of the indian penal code and are punishable

in the courts of law by fine or imprisonment or both. paper banknotes are printed on special watermarked paper with substrate cotton and cotton rag. this gives the banknotes a unique “ touch feel ” and “ crackling sound ”. watermark the portrait of mahatma gandhi, the multi - directional lines and an electrolyte mark showing the denomination value appear in thi s section and these can be viewed better when the banknote is held against light. security thread all banknotes carry a security thread, partially exposed and partially

embedded, with readable window. the security thread of notes up to rs 500 denomination contains “ bharath ” in hindi and “ rbi ” in english alternately. rs 1000 denomination notes additionally contain “ 1000 ” as a numeral in the security thread. micro lettering the letters “ rbi ” and the denomination value as a numeral can be viewed with the help of a magnifying glass in the zone between the portrait of mahatma gandhi and the right vertical band. ( however, only letters “ rbi ” is seen in rs. 10 denomination ). intaglio printing

the name reserve bank of india, the guarantee clause, the promise clause, the signature of rbi governor, the portrait of mahatma gandhi, the reserve bank seal, the ashoka pillar emblem, the central denomination value in words and figures are printed in intaglio, i. e., in raised prints which can be felt by touch. fluorescence the number panels of banknotes are printed in fluorescent link. optically variable ink the colour of the denomination in numeral appears green when the note is held flat and changes to blue when the note is held at an angle. the font

size also appears reduced. this feature is available only on notes of rs. 500 and rs. 1000 denominations. latent image the vertical band contains the denomination in numeral. this can be seen by keeping the note flat on the palm of your hand at eye level and viewing it against the light. we have to know more about currency notes used for financial transactions. genuine currency notes have certain security features. awareness of those features can save us from being duped. fundamental duties - it shall be the duty of every citizen of india : contentscontentscontentscontentscontents

contentscontentscontentscontentscontents 07. india after independence 137 - 150 08. kerala towards modernity 151 - 170 09. the state and political science 171 - 182 10. civic consciousness 183 - 192 11. sociology : what? why? 193 - 210 about the book the part i of social science textbook consists of eleven chapters related to history, political science, and sociology. among them, seven chapters deal with history. the first two chapters are related to world history and the subsequent four chapters discuss themes from indian history. one chapter is

related to kerala history. incorporating maximum historical sources, these chapters are designed widely, utilizing the scope of thematic presentation. they are the extension of lessons presented in the seventh standard. the entire chapters have been planned ensuring continuity and extension of the contents discussed in the previous classes. the seventh standard textbook emphasises on chronological presentation of personalities, movements, facts, etc. on the other hand the textbook for standard x introduces the historical process by giving prominence to the analysis of concepts rather than

presenting mere facts and events. the ideals like liberty, democracy, secularism, and nationalism - inevitable for the human life in modern era - were evolved as part of freedom struggles and revolutions that took place in various continents. the development and progress of such modern ideologies are introduced and analysed in the first chapter, ' the revolutions that influenced the world '. the major events in the world during the twentieth century and its impact are discussed in the second chapter, ' world in the twentieth century '. it focuses on the impacts

rather than the mere description of facts and events. wars evolve from human mind, hence naturally the resistance against war should also come from within. this is the underlying theme of this chapter. this is followed by chapters on history of modern india, dealing with the nationalist movement as a reaction to the imperialistic exploitation of the british. ' british exploitation and resistance ' discusses how the british exploitation led different sections of people to develop anti - colonial sentiment and economic nationalism.

the impact of nationalism on indian cultural life is described in the chapter, ' culture and nationalism '. the chapter, ' struggle and freedom ' discusses how the national movement, initially limited to the upper class and the educated, became a mass movement. the challenges faced by the post - independent india and its journey towards progress are discussed in the chapter, ' india after independence '. the subject matter of ‘ kerala towards modernity ’ is various socio - political movements that led to the formation of kerala, and its march towards modernity.

as a part of political science, the features and structure of public administrative system, and the administrative reforms in india are introduced in the chapter, ' public administration '. the chapter, ' the state and political science ' describes the elements of a state, and the rights and duties of a citizen. it points towards the relevance of political science as a discipline. the chapter, ' civic consciousness ', discusses the significance of civic consciousness in a democratic society. the last chapter ' sociology : what? why? ' discusses the

importance of sociology as a discipline and introduces various sociological methods to study social phenomena. the themes, learning activities, reflective questions, questions for self evaluation, and extended activities that facilitate the knowledge construction process are included in all the chapters. we hope you would be able to extend the scope of the contents in this textbook by proper exploration of these avenues and make construction of knowledge more effective and activity - based. these are the observations made by rabindranath tagore in 1941. what did he indicate by these lines?

the british would have to put an end to their rule in india they would leave behind a miserable country we have already discussed how centuries - old british rule shattered india socially, culturally and economically. the flow of refugees was the major challenge that the post independent india had to face. flow of refugees the pictures given above portray the refugees travelling with their families and belongings seeking shelters. this was a common sight in india after independence 138 india during the time of partition. during that time there was an influx of refugees from india

to pakistan and vice versa. along with this, communal riots broke out in various places. calcutta, bihar, noakhali, delhi, punjab and kashmir witnessed bloody riots. thousands of people were killed and women were attacked. as a result, different sections of people lost all their belongings and became refugees. around ten million people travelled as refugees on foot, trains and bullock carts. however, the rehabilitation efforts and affirmative actions of the government solved the problems. discuss the context of refugee problem in independent india. integration of princely states

there were around six hundred princely states in pre - independent india, in addition to the territories directly ruled by the british. britain gave these princely states the options to join either india or pakistan or to be independent. integration of these princely states into the indian union was another challenge before the new nation. the integration was really a herculean task and sardar vallabhbhai patel was the union minister entrusted with this mission. he appointed v. p. menon, a keralite, as secretary of the department of states.

patel and v. p. menon prepared an instrument of accession, which stipulated that the princely states had to transfer their control over defence, external affairs, and information and communication to the government of india. following the diplomacy of the government and popular protests, majority of the princely states signed the martyrdom of the mahatma " the light has gone out of our lives and there is darkness ". these are the words of nehru when gandhiji was assassinated. gandhiji, who led the non violent movement to free india from the british

rule, was shot dead by nathuram vinayak godse when he was heading for a prayer meeting on 30 january, 1948. assassination of gandhiji was the repercussion of communal riots which broke out after the partition of india. india after independence 139 instrument of accession and joined indian union. but some states such as hyderabad, kashmir and junagarh resented. finally they were also integrated into the indian union through conciliation talks and military interventions. even after independence, france and portugal continued their control over some places in india. following mass protest,

france handed over its territories under their control to india. territories under the control of portugal were accessed to india through military operations. sardar vallabhbhai patel there are a number of films based on the partition of india. rithik ghattak ' s ' mekhe dhaka dara ', m. s. satyu ' s ' garam hawa ', govind nihalani ' s ' tamass ' and, pamela rooks ' ' train to pakistan ' are some of such famous films. partition on the screen france portugal pondicherry, karaikkal, mahe and yanam goa, daman and diu 1954 1961 country suzerainties year of accession v. p. menon v. p. menon was born at

ottappalam in palakkad district in 1894. before joining as a clerk in the delhi secretariat, he worked in various offices. the government entrusted him with many missions considering his proficiency in english. along with nehru and sardar patel, he played a major role in the integration of the princely states. he was appointed as the governor of orissa in 1952. ' the transfer of power in india ', and ' integration of indian states ' are books penned by him. india after independence 140 the outer cover of indian constitution dr. b. r. ambedkar dr. rajendra prasad

constitution and the first general election the constitution of india is the foundation of our nation making. as per the recommendation of cabinet mission, a constituent assembly was formed in 1946, under the chairmanship of dr. rajendra prasad. the committee drafted the constitution after a series of discussions and debates. our constitution is a reflection of the visions and dreams that evolved during the freedom movement. the constitution came into effect on 26 january 1950 and india was declared a republic. another challenge india confronted was the formation of a

democratic system. the first general election in line with the constitution was held in 1951 - 1952. this free and fair election was a success of indian democracy. when many asian and african countries which became free along with india have deviated from democracy, our democratic system still remains strong. prepare a presentation on the different stages of formation of constitution and the person related to it. discuss the role of the constitution of india in fostering democracy. linguistic reorganization of states we have already discussed the integration of the princely states. a

major problem faced by the people of these states was related to language. there were many princely states with people speaking different languages. so there were demands from different parts of india for the formation of states on the basis of language. in 1920 india after independence 141 the nagpur session of the indian national congress resolved to form its state committees on the basis of language. after independence, people agitated for the formation of states along linguistic lines. potti sriramalu, a freedom fighter, started

satyagraha for the formation of andhra pradesh for telugu - speaking people. after 58 days of fasting, his martyedom and it intensified the mass agitation. following this, in 1953, the government of india formed the state of andhra pradesh for telugu speaking people. after this, the demand for linguistic states intensified. the government of india formed a commission to reorganise indian states on the basis of languages, with fazl ali as chairman and h. n. kunzru and k. m. panikkar, a keralite, as members. as per the recommendations of the commission, the parliament passed

the states reorganisation act in 1956. thus, 14 states and 6 union territories came into effect. afterwards, new states were formed in various phases. now, india has 29 states and 7 union territories. fazl ali k. m. panikkar h. n. kunzru potti sriramalu why did independent india choose language as a criterion for the reorganization of states? prepare a learning resource consisting of 29 states and 6 union territories of india progress in economic sector the economic condition of independent india was very pathetic. india accepted the mixed economy consisting of the qualities of capitalist

and socialist economies. it gave importance to public sector. you have studied the evolution of indian economic planning in former classes. the first government under the leadership of jawaharlal nehru adopted series of plans and schemes aiming at economic nt - 871 - 2 - soc. sci. - i - 10 - e - vol. 2 india after independence 142 development of the country. most of these plans were the outcome of the discussions held in the conferences of the congress during the time of freedom struggle. centralized economic planning was the most important among them. the concept of

economic planning was borrowed from the soviet union. economic planning got impetus after the independence. the planning commission of india ( pci ) was formed under the chairmanship of jawaharlal nehru in 1950. it devised many projects for economic progress. the planning commission adopted the five year plans aiming the economic growth of the nation. the five year plans started in 1951 helped india go ahead with the process of development. they also helped alleviate poverty, flourish agriculture and industrial sectors, improve education and generate new energy

sources. we got assistance from foreign countries for our economic development. with their support, we set up iron and steel industries in various parts of the country. nehru at the meeting of the planning commission planning commission planning commission of india came into existence on march 15, 1950, with jawaharlal nehru, the then prime minister as chairman and gulzarilal nanda as vice chairman. t. t. krishnamachari and c. d. desmukh were members of the commission. bhakra nangal project iron and steel assisting industrial firms countries bhilai bocaro rourkela durgapur soviet union

soviet union germany britain major dams had a significant role in modernizing indian economy. they were our primary sources india after independence 143 for irrigation and electricity. bhakra nangal project, the largest multipurpose project in the country, is a pride of independent india. irrigation facilities boosted agricultural production in india. on 2 october 1952, marking the birthday of mahatma gandhi, the government started 55 projects aiming at better facilities for infrastructure, farming and livestock development.

in 1990s an explicit deviation occured in indian economy. it began to focus on private sector rather than public sector. analyse the job opportunities related to engi - neering, agri - cultural rese - arch, tourism, planning etc achievements in science and technology independent india made remarkable achievements in science and technology. technology and technocrats have played a significant role in her development in agriculture and industry. under the leadership of jawaharlal nehru, an ardent fan of modern science and technology, india made great achievements in science and technology and

established several research institutions for the development of science and technology. some of them are : council of scientific and industrial research ( csir ) indian council of agricultural research ( icar ) indian council of medical research ( icmr ) two stalwarts of indian science, homi jahangir bhabha and s. n. bhatnagar, helmed the projects of the council for scientific and industrial research. h. j. bhabha was the head of tata institute of fundamental research and indian atomic energy commission. homi jahangir bhabha s. n. bhatnagar

conduct a classroom discussion on the economic development of independent india. what are the features of the initiatives taken by independent india in the economic sector. india after independence 144 during the same time, world - class engineering institutes were also established in the country. five indian institutes of technology ( iits ) were started between 1954 and 1964. nehru strongly believed that india should minimize her dependence on western countries in science and technology. subsequently india made tremendous progress in

medical science, biomedical engineering, genetics, biotechnology, health science, marine technology, information technology, atomic energy and transportation. space research in india independent india conducted various space explorations and experiments. in 1962, nehru, with the technical advice of vikram sarabhai, formed the indian national committee for space research ( incospar ). following this, in 1969, indian space research organization ( isro ) was established to lead space research. the first rocket - launching station in india was established in thumba, near thiruvananthapuram.

as a result of the collective efforts of india ' s space research experts, first satellite aryabhatta was successfully launched in 1975. in addition to satellites, space vehicles and rocket launchers were also developed. it was because of the far sightedness of jawaharlal nehru that india became the first developing nation to make and launch satellites. there are several agencies that develop satellites in india now, they are : national remote sensing agency ( nrsa ) physical research laboratory ( prl ) india has also advanced much in missile technology. agni and

prithwi are the missiles developed by india. dr. raja ramanna and vssc thumba aryabhatta isro headquarters, bangaluru dr. raja ramanna india after independence 145 dr. a. p. j. abdul kalam led our experiments in the atomic energy sector. with the new space missions such as chandrayan and mangalyan, india has entered a new era in space exploration. chandrayan which began in 2008 is india ' s first lunar mission. with this, india became a member in the coveted group to launch space shuttle to the lunar orbit after america, russia, european space agency, china and japan. mangalyan

the space mission of india to mars is the indian - made space shuttle that covered the longest distance in space. india is all set to take on new experiments in space. dr. a. p. j. abdul kalam dr. a. p. j. abdul kalam, the eleventh president of india, was a scientist and researcher. he was a renowned expert in missile technology. being the head of the isro, he played a major role in developing satellite launch vehicles such as slv3 and pslv. he is known as the ' missile man of india '. identify the areas of higher studies related to space science tech - nology in the post independent india

prepare a picture album based on india ' s achievements in space research. how did the achievements in the field of science help the development of india? vikram sarabhai as a scientist vikram sarabhai contributed richly to the advancement of indian atomic energy research and space technology. after his higher education at cambridge university, sarabhai joined physical research laboratory in ahmedabad as its professor and director. he is the mastermind behind the space research centre in thumba and the satellite communication centre in ahmedabad. to

commemorate his contributions, the space research centre in thumba is named as vikram sarabhai space centre ( vssc ). india after independence 146 education ' ' the destiny of india is being shaped in her classrooms '. dr. d. s. kothari this is the observation of dr. d. s. kothari, citing the importance of education. he was appointed as the chairman of the commission for the comprehensive study of education in independent india. recognising the importance of education in nation building, our national leaders framed indigenous education policies suitable to indian

context. the government appointed various commissions to study indian education and to submit recommendations. details of them are given below : commissions objectives recommendations radhakrishnan to study university start professional commission ( 1948 ) education educatioal institutions give emphsis to women edcuation form the univesity grants commission ( ugc ) lakshmana swami to study secondary implement three mudaliar commission education language formula ( 1952 ) form secondary education commission establish multipurpose schools form a council for teacher training

kothari to propose a national implement 10 + 2 + 3 commission ( 1964 ) pa ttern of education pattern of education start vocational education at secondary level focus on value education. national policy on education was formulated in 1986 with an objective to prepare india to face the challenges of the new millennium. major recommendations of the national policy on education 1986 are as follows : india after independence 147 cultural achievements free india made tremendous progress in the field of culture. you have learnt in previous classes that

india has a unique cultural tradition. many cultural institutions were established to promote cultural activities in india and abroad. cultural exchange for teachers government of india established centre for cultural resource and training in delhi in 1979 with the objective of converging education with the culture of our country. its aim is to organise various cultural exchange programmes for students and teachers. and rashtriya madhyamik siksha abhiyan analyze the educational achievements in independent india focusing on primary and continuing education

launching operation blackboard programme to universalise primary education and to improve infrastructure facilities in schools. starting navodaya vidyalayas in every district encouraging girls ' education maulana abul kalam azad maulana abul kalam azad is the first education minister of independent india. he played pivotal role in forming the national education policy of independent india. november 11, his birthday, is observed as national education day. ' india wins freedom ' is his famous book. sarva siksha abhiyan and rashtriya madhyamik siksha abhiyan

introduced by union government, are joined together and implemented as samagra sikhsha abhiyan on 2018 onwards new policy on education paved the way for remarkable changes in education. in 2009 government of india enacted a law by which education became a fundamental right. india after independence 148 the foreign policy of independent india reflects the values of indian national movement. examine. foreign policy " our objective is peaceful coexistence, ensuring freedom and welfare for all people in the world. and, i remind the world that we are not to create problems for anyone. "

jawaharlal nehru in a public speech in 1947 the words of jawaharlal nehru reflect india ' s approach to other nations. free india adopted the foreign policy framed by the indian national congress during the struggle for independence. jawaharlal nehru is the chief architect of the foreign policy of india. main principles of india ' s foreign policy are : resistance to colonialism and imperialism hostility to racism trust in the united nations organization peaceful co - existence panchsheel principles emphasis on the necessity of foreign assistance policy of non - alignment

institution activities headquarters sangit natak formerly known as national academy akademi of dance, drama and music. promotion of drama and music. new delhi lalit kala akademi promotion of indian arts in india and abroad. new delhi sahitya akademi promotion of literature in indian languages. new delhi national school established under the of drama sangit natak akademy conducts national drama festival every year. new delhi national book to make books available trust of india cost effectively. to encourage reading habit. to promote indian books

in india and abroad. new delhi india after independence 149 analyse the current foreign policy of india and discuss whether there is any deviation from our fundamental principles. panchsheel principles the panchsheel principles are the agreement signed by india and china in 1954. this agreement was signed by jawaharlal nehru and chou en - lai the then prime minister of china. eventhough panchsheel agreement was signed with china, india ' s approach to all other nations was also based on these principles. they are as follows : mutual respect for each other ' s territorial integrity and sovereignty

mutual non - aggression mutual non - interference in each other ' s internal affairs equality and cooperation for mutual benefit peaceful co - existence we have already discussed the non - aligned movement formed during the post second world war period. jawaharlal nehru was one of the leaders behind its formation. rather than affiliating to a power bloc india took a stand evaluating the merits and demerits in international affairs. india after independence refugee problem and integration of princely states constitution and general election linguistic reorganisation of states economic policy

advancement in science and education cultural scenario foreign policy instrument of accession, sardar vallabhai patel, v. p. menon 1950 january 26, dr. rajendra prasad dr. b. r. ambedkar states reorganization commission planning commission five year plans research institutes space technology radhakrishnan commission mudaliyar commission kothari commission national policy on education sangit natak akademi lalit kala akademi sahitya akademi non - alignment, panchsheel principles prepare a presentation about the achievements of india in different fields after independence india after independence

150 write an essay on the international relations of india. prepare a table including the names of indian states with their capitals and the year of formation. prepare and present an online quiz based on the achievements of independent india in various domains. what were the major problems faced by india when she got independence? write a short note on the integration of the princely states? analyse the circumstances that led to the linguistic reorganization of states. write a note on the formation of the constitution of india.

" free india made notable achievement in science and technology. " examine the validity of the statement. explain the advancement in space research in independent india explain the major features of national policy on education 1986. make a list of the fundamental principles of india ' s foreign policy. what does the above diary note indicate? europeans came to kerala for trade by the end of the fiftenth century. the arabs and the chinese were the prominent foreigners who had kept trade relations with kerala prior to

the europeans. the portuguese aimed to end the arab and chinese trade monopoly in the kerala coast. they demanded zamorin the ruler of kozhikode to expel the arab merchants from kozhikode. but zamorin rejected this demand and this made the portuguese furious. so the portuguese 1498 20 may sunday there were beautiful hillsthere were beautiful hillsthere were beautiful hillsthere were beautiful hillsthere were beautiful hills nearby. our guides couldn ' tnearby. our guides couldn ' tnearby. our guides couldn ' tnearby. our guides couldn ' tnearby. our guides couldn ' t

recognise the location precisely. recognise the location precisely. recognise the location precisely. recognise the location precisely. recognise the location precisely. as we reached closer to the landas we reached closer to the landas we reached closer to the landas we reached closer to the landas we reached closer to the land they told that we are to thethey told that we are to thethey told that we are to thethey told that we are to thethey told that we are to the

north of kalikooth and this wasnorth of kalikooth and this wasnorth of kalikooth and this wasnorth of kalikooth and this wasnorth of kalikooth and this was our destination. that night weour destination. that night weour destination. that night weour destination. that night weour destination. that night we anchored two furlong away fromanchored two furlong away fromanchored two furlong away fromanchored two furlong away fromanchored two furlong away from kalikooth. we did so becausekalikooth. we did so becausekalikooth. we did so becausekalikooth. we did so becausekalikooth. we did so because

our guide mistook kapyaour guide mistook kapyaour guide mistook kapyaour guide mistook kapyaour guide mistook kapya ( kappad ) for kalikooth. nearby ( kappad ) for kalikooth. nearby ( kappad ) for kalikooth. nearby ( kappad ) for kalikooth. nearby ( kappad ) for kalikooth. nearby there is a town calledthere is a town calledthere is a town calledthere is a town calledthere is a town called pandarayanai ( pandalaini ). somepandarayanai ( pandalaini ). somepandarayanai ( pandalaini ). somepandarayanai ( pandalaini ). somepandarayanai ( pandalaini ). some

people approached us from thepeople approached us from thepeople approached us from thepeople approached us from thepeople approached us from the coast on four country boats. theycoast on four country boats. theycoast on four country boats. theycoast on four country boats. theycoast on four country boats. they wanted to know to whichwanted to know to whichwanted to know to whichwanted to know to whichwanted to know to which country we belonged. theycountry we belonged. theycountry we belonged. theycountry we belonged. theycountry we belonged. they

showed us the route toshowed us the route toshowed us the route toshowed us the route toshowed us the route to kalikooth. kalikooth. kalikooth. kalikooth. kalikooth. diary notes of alvaro venhov, a portuguese sailor who arrived in kerala along with vasco de gama kerala towards modernity 152 marthanda discuss the arrival of europeans in kerala and their goals sought the help of kochi, the enemy state of kozhikode, to gain trade supremacy in kerala. though the zamorins ' navy under the leadership of kunhali marakkar bravely resisted the portuguese, they lost. the portuguese, the dutch,

the english and the french were competing each other for trade monopoly in kerala. the competion was mainly for black pepper. consequently, the dutch expelled the portuguese from kerala in 1663. but the dutch were forced to leave kerala as they were defeated by marthanda varma of travancore with the help of the british in the battle of colachel in 1741. trouncing the french in the karnatic wars, the british possessed trade monopoly in south india. kunhali marakkars kunhali marakkars were the captains of the naval force of the zamorins of kozhikode. marakkar fort in putuppanam near

vatakara was their headquarters. there were four kunhalis. it was kunhali iii who helped the zamorin to regain the chaliyam fort from the portu - guese. praising this victory khasi muhammed wrote a poem in the 16 ce. in arabic named ' fat - hul - mubin ' ( clear victory ). kunhali mariakar monument - vadakara english east india company to kerala captain william keeling, the representative of the english east india company, came to kerala in 1615. he visited and signed a trade agreement with the zamorin of kozhikode. later, the company secured the consent to start warehouses at

vizhinjam, thalassery, and anchuthengu. gradually, they attained the permission from the queen of attingal to build a fort at battle of colachel " for the dutch, the battle of colachel was destructive. it was not a big battle like battle of plassey but was the sunset of dutch dream to capture kerala ( malabar ). it is the first terrible setback faced by the dutch armament. never had they got back from this shock again. this was the moral achievement of the battle of colachel. " sardar k m panicker, history of kerala ' learn, you the sultans from this hindu king for, he fought equally for the cause

of islam and hindu dharma ' these lines denote the religious harmony that existed in kerala. kerala towards modernity 153 prepare a note on how malabar, travancore and kochi came under the british rule. anchuthengu. later, anchuthengu became an important military centre of the british in the western coast. the natives were furious when anchuthengu became a british military base. in 1721, the natives killed about 150 englishmen who were on their way to handover gifts to the queen of attingal. it is known as the attingal revolt. it is considered as

the first organized revolt against the british in kerala. as per the sreeranga pattanam treaty of 1792 between the british and the mysore rulers, malabar came under british control. in 1792 kochi raja accepted british supremacy and was forced to pay tribute. according to the treaty of 1795, travancore also admitted the british dominance. in return, the british promised protection to travancore from its enemies. thus the british ruled malabar directly and kochi and travancore indirectly through the subservient samantha rajas. in short, whole of

kerala came under the control of the british by the end of the eighteenth century. early resistances against the british excerpts from the kundara proclamation by veluthampi dalawa " it is their racial tradition to occupy other nations through deception. if a country comes into their hand grip, their army would take over the control of the palace, fort and all. it will be an end of traditional dignity, position and customs of the king and the elite. they will monopolize the trade including salt. and they will own all the goods, houses, paddies,

and fruit - growing estates. even the silly crimes will be cruelly punished by their despicable servants. " krishna chaithanya, keralam after attaining political dominance, the british started to interfere in the powers of the kings and landlords. the interference in the freedom and privileges that they enjoyed for centuries invited antagonism from the kings and landlords. there were lot of resistances against the british across malabar, kochi and travancore. kerala towards modernity 154 pazhassi revolts keralavarma pazhassi raja of kottayam royal family led the resistance against the

british in malabar. the british promised pazhassi the right to collect tax from kottayam region as a reward for helping them in the wars against mysore. the british refused to keep their promise after the triumph in the battle. moreover, the british claimed their dominance over wayanad. pazhassi raja organised the people and fought against the british. he unleashed guerilla war against the british with the help of chempan pokker, kaitheri ambu nair, edachena kunkan nair and thalakkal chandu, the leader of the kurichias in wayanad. in the fight against the british he

was assulted his life on 30 november 1805. veluthampi and paliathachan veluthampi and paliathachan, the dewans, reacted against the uncontrolled intervention of the british in the internal affairs of travancore and kochi respectively. veluthampi called for armed fight against the british through his kundara proclamation on 11 january 1809. the armies of travancore and kochi jointly attacked the official residence of the british resident macaulay. but they could not withstand the british army. realising that he would be captured, veluthampi

committed suicide at the mannadi temple. the frantic british army pazhassi memorial - mananthavadi lion of kerala pazhassi raja, known as kerala lion, was characterized as ‘ paichi raja ’ or ‘ kottyottu raja ’ in the brit - ish documents. based on the life of pazhassi raja sardar k m panicker wrote a historical novel titled ' kerala simham '. according to the novel, pazhassi raja, preferring death over capture by the british, swallowed a diamond ring, to kill himself. the statue of veluthampi and the veluthampi memorial at mannadi kerala towards modernity 155 paliyathachan export import coconut

jaggery cashew - nut black pepper arecanut iron ore cloth kerosene tobacco sugar metal products railway the british set up the first rail - way line in kerala, from beypore to tirur in 1861. they made use of the railways to transport raw materials and to take industrial products to remote villages. examine the above list and make your assumptions on foreign trade in kerala prepare a list of the early resistance against the british in kerala including the regions where they broke out and their reasons. hanged his body at kannanmula, thiruvananthapuram and deported

paliathachan to madras. fights of local chieftains against the british came to an end by the defeat of pazhassi, veluthampi and paliathachan. but the popular resistance continued. kerala becomes a part of world market taking up the administrative control, the british could gain kerala merchandises at cheap price and sell out their industrial products at high prices. with this, keralas self - sufficient village economy was destroyed. foreign trade spread across the region under the rule of the british and kerala became a part of the world market.

the trade laws that existed in malabar, kochi and travancore were amended by the british in their favour. they introduced unified coinage and metrology systems. roads, bridges and railways were built to improve transportation facilities kerala towards modernity 156 travancore kochi malabar pandarappatta vilambaram kudiyaima niyaman malabar kudiyaima niyaman 1865 1914 1929 give a detailed account of the results of the attempts made by the british to improve trade targeting the carriage of goods. for better trade facilities, they developed

the ports at kochi, kozhikode and alapuzha. changes in land relations the british rule made drastic changes in the pattern of land ownership enjoyed by different sections of people in the society. local chieftains and landlords were considered as the owners of land and the tax they had to pay to the british was pre - determined. local chieftains and landlords collected tax from the tenants in excess and evicted them. as a result, life of the tenants in malabar became pathetic. remember the revolts mentioned in the previous chapter. the tenants got limited right

over the land by the implementation of malabar tenants ' act of 1929. it was based on the report of the logan commission that was entrusted with inquiring about the mappila uprisings. changes in land relations started in travancore from the time of marthanda varma itself. land of the madambis ( feudal lords ) were converted into pandaramvaka ( government property ). the government of travancore made a landmark proclamation in 1865 granting the tenants ownership of the lands they cultivated. it is known as the ' pandarappatta vilambaram '. the janmi - kudian act passed in 1896 also

granted land ownership to the tenants in travancore. hence, majority of the tenants in travancore became land owners at least in name. in return, they were compelled to pay huge amount of tax to the government. in short, the tenants in travancore also suffered a lot due to the tax burden. in kochi the tenancy act ( kudiyaima niyamam ) was enacted in 1914. kerala towards modernity 157 conolly ' s plot english east india company needed plenty of teakwood for cargo ship building. the com - pany entrusted henry valentine conolly, the collector with the task of planting teak on

the fertile soil of malabar. conolly planted teak in a plot of 1500 acres in nilambur dur - ing 1823 - 38. later, the plot came to be known as conolly ' s plot. analyse the changes commercialisation brought about in kerala ' s agricultural sector commercialisation of agricultural sector the british rule made great changes in the pattern of agriculture. kerala products, were in great demand in foreign markets. coffee, tea, cardamom, were cultivated in large plantations in hilly areas with the beginning of other crops, paddy production declined. the result was food shortage. to overcome this

situation, tapioca cultivation extended to large areas. at the same time teak plantation was started in nilambur under the guidance of conolly. most of the plantations were owned by the british. the rulers of kochi and travancore facilitated transpor - tation and leased out forest lands to the british to start estates. gradually kerala became a hub of cash crop production. teak plantation - nilambur growth of plantation and traditional industries the british started plantation industries in kerala with their own capital

for processing and exporting cash crops. tea and coffee factories and rubber processing units were set up in high ranges. in the meantime, traditional industries related to coconut, coir, cashewnut, handloom and beedi were also developed. oil mills using diesel engines were started at many places in kerala. alappuzha was the hub of coconut oil industry. in 1859 james dara from ireland, started a coir factory in alappuzha. cashewnut processing and exporting factories were established in kollam. tile nt - 871 - 3 - soc. sci. - i - 10 - e - vol. 2 kerala towards modernity 158

factories in faroke, kollam, and olloor, and handloom factories in kannur and kozhikode started functioning. beedi companies were started in kannur rise of modern industries modern factories were established in kerala by the middle of the twentieth century. majority of them were in travancore and kochi. rulers of travancore adopted policies promoting modern industries. the british provided technical and financial support to the industries. the establishment of pallivasal hydro electric project propelled the development of modern industries. the main factories started during

that period are : punaloor paper mills - kollam fact k alamassery - ernakulam kundara ceramics - kollam rubber works - thiruvananthapuram tata oil mills - kochi alagappatextile mill - kochi banks were started in kerala as institutions for accumulating capital and dealing with financial affairs. the nedungadi bank was the first private bank in kerala. later, the imperial bank, the indian national bank and the chartered bank came into existence. tile factory - faroke coir factory - alappuzha prepare a note on plantation and traditional industries developed

in different parts of kerala and the factors that contributed to their growth. hydro electric project - pallivasal what are the skills that need to be developed by workers related with the plantation and tradi - tional industries available in your locality. prepare a digital presentation on the idnustries developed in kerala during the british rule kerala towards modernity 159 missionaries f ield of work london mission society ( lms ) church mission society ( cms ) basel evangelical mission ( bem ) travancore kochi, travancore malabar gauri parvathy bhai british influence on culture

the beginning of printing in kerala was with the advent of the europeans. the jesuit missionaries were highly interested in publishing dictionaries and grammar texts. dr. angelos francis prepared the first malayalam grammar text and arnos pathiri the first malayalam dictionary. ` samkshepavedartham ' is the first book to be entirely published in malayalam language. english - malayalam and malayalam - english dictionaries were published by the missionaries benjamin beyli and dr. herman gundert respectively. herman gundert also published the first malayalam newspapers namely ' rajyasamacharam '

and ' pashchimodayam ' from thalassery. elucidate the role played by the early missionaries in the field of education in kerala herman gundert make a flow chart showing the industrial development in kerala during the british rule. the policy of education for all, irrespective of caste and religion, was flagged off in kerala with the educational programmes of the missionaries. the rulers of kochi and travancore granted land to the missionaries to start educational institutions. the rulers of travancore and kochi also intervened in the educational

sectors by establishing schools and colleges. the proclamation of free primary education in 1817 by gauri parvathy bhai, the ruler of travancore, is a remarkable one of its kind. kerala towards modernity 160 in previous classes we have discussed the punitive measures that existed in kerala before the arrival of the british. at that time, the nature of trial and punishment was based on the caste of the accused. the british reformed this system of law and justice. in the new system after hearing the accused, unified punishment was given depending on the nature of

the guilt. with this the principle of equality before law irrespective of caste was established. trial courts were started at different places of kerala. modern medicine gained more importance than kerala ' s traditional ayurvedic system of medicine during the british rule. small pox vaccination was introduced for the first time in malabar. the travancore rulers formed a company to import medicines from england. government hospitals were started in malabar, kochi and travancore. the system of inheritance then existed among some communities in

kerala was marumakkathyam, matrilineal in nature. the english - educated youths revolted against this and even initiated lawsuits. as a result, acts were introduced against matrilineal system in travancore, malabar and kochi. the new regulations stressed patrilineal inheritance by which all the members in the family could enjoy rights over property. the new system led to the decline of joint families and the ' tharavadu ' system. though these reforms were introduced to exploit the natural resources of kerala and to make administration smooth, they also prompted

modernisation of the society of kerala. kerala : a lunatic asylum " was there ever a sillier thing before in the world than what i saw in malabar country? the lower class is not allowed to pass through the same street as the high - caste man,... what inference would you draw except that these malabaris are all lunatics, their homes so many lunatic asylums? " swami vivekananda - madras ( 1897 ) discuss the changes in the fields of health and judicial sector of kerala during the british period. reform movements and social changes kerala towards modernity 161

social reformers organisations / activities vaikunda swamikal samathwasamajam chattambi swamikal protested against joint family system, ' sambadham ' and ' marumakkathayam ' sri narayana guru sri narayana dharma paripalana yogam kuriakose elias chavara established educational institutions and orphanages ayyankali sadhu jana paripalana sangham vakkom abdulkhader maulavi thiruvithamkur muslim mahajanasabha vaghbhadanandhan admavidhyasangham sahodaran ayyapan sahodaraprasthanam pandit k p karuppan araya samajam mannathu padmanabhan nair service society

v t bhattathiripad yogakshemasabha kumara gurudevan prathyaksha raksha daiva sabha prepare a digital magazine including profiles and pictures of social reformers in kerala to what extend the ideologies of social reformers relevant to the present kerala society? discuss. have you observed the comments of swami vivekananda detailing the 19th century social context in kerala? caste system was strong in kerala. certain section of the people were considered untouchable and unapproachable. caste decided the social status of a person. many social evils and superstitions

existed in every caste. modern education and western ideologies motivated people to realise the stupidity in caste system and superstitions. many reform movements sprang up to fight inequality and social evils in the society. kerala towards modernity 162 social reform movements fuelled the struggles for social change. the channar women of southern travancore fought for the right to cover their upper body. as a result, uthram thirunal maharaja was forced to permit the channar women to wear jackets in 1859. the consecration of the idol of lord shiva at

aruvippuram by sri narayana guru in 1888 caused the rise of new insights in the social sphere. consequently, the lower caste people gained right to perform the poojas and temple rituals. in front of the aruvippuram temple, sri narayana guru inscribed : " it is a model place where people live without caste disparity or religious aversion, but with fraternity ". guru gave importance to education and started schools and libraries along with temples. he wished to " enlighten through education and strengthen by union ". calling for ' not to argue and win but to know and

inform ', he convened an all religion conference in aluva. the working and messages of sri. narayana guru were based on noble human love and fratenity among all religions. the vaikom satyagraha ( 1924 ), led by t. k. madhavan was one of the major struggles that took place in kerala for claiming the right to travel. expressing solidarity with the satyagraha, mannath padmanabhan organised the savarna jatha. following this struggle the lower castes secured permission to travel through the roads around the vaikom temple. similarly, under the leadership of k. kelappan an agitation was launched

demanding entry for all castes of hindus into the guruvayur temple ( 1931 ). a. k. gopalan was the volunteer captain of this struggle. p. krishna pillai was callously attacked during this satygraha. following these popular protests, the temple entry proclamation was announced on 12 november 1936 in travancore. following this, temple entry proclamations were issued in madras and kochi and all sections of the society were offered the right to worship in temples. t. k. madhavan mannath padmanabhan a. k. gopalan p. krishna pillai k. kelappan daiva dasaka and athmopadesa sathaka

in the ocean of your glory of great profundity. let us all, together, be - come immersed to dwell therein ever - lastingly happiness. ( daiva dasaka ) what is known as that person, or this person, when considered carefully, is the one undifferented form of the primeval self. whatever one does for the happiness of one ' s own self should also include the happiness of others. ( athmopadesa sathaka - verse 24 ) kerala towards modernity 163 national movement in kerala the national movement in kerala lacked a unified form as the state was

not administratively united. the british ruled the malabar region directly, wheras kochi and travancore were indirectly ruled through the resident. because of this reason, political agitations were not active in kochi and travancore as in malabar. malabar in malabar political activities gained momentum during the first world war. the first conference of the malabar district congress chaired by annie beasant was held at palakkad in 1916. k p kesava menon, k p raman menon, muhammed abdurahman sahib, k. madhavan nair, e. moidu moulavi and m. p. narayana menon were at the helm of the

congress in malabar during this period. the last malabar political conference held at manjeri in 1920 discussed several issues like political reforms, problems of tenants, the khilafat and so on. in 1920, gandiji and shoukathali visited calicut and declared their support to the khilafat movement. the khilafat committee was formed with kattilasseri mohamed moulavi and mohammed abdurahiman sahib as the president and the secretary respectively. the khilafat movement became strong in malabar. subsequently, there were direct fights with the british in several

places in malabar. the mappila peasants of malabar fought against the british in eranad, valluvanad, and ponnani taluks. these struggles, in general, are known as malabar rebellion ( 1921 ). in 1930s, the civil disobedience movement gained momentum in malabar. people broke the salt law by making salt under the leadership of k kelappan and mohammed abdu rahiman at payyannur and kozhikode respectively. the british army brutally attacked the satyagrahis and arrested the leaders. boycott of foreign goods, picketing liquor shops and popularising mohammed abdu rahiman e. moidu moulavi k. p. kesava

menon evaluate the role of channar revolt, vaikkom satyagraha, and guruvayoor satyagraha to bring about social change in kerala kerala towards modernity 164 khadi were also part of the civil disobedience movement. when gandhiji called back the civil disobedience movement, many congress members in kerala moved to the socialist party. in 1939 the congress socialist party was reorganized as the communist party of india. e m s namboothiripad, a k gopalan and p krishna pillai were the prominent leaders of the party. they organized peasants and workers to fight against the

janmi system and the british imperialism. protests were held at kayyoor, morazha, karivellur, etc. under the banner of peasant organisations. protests relating to the quit india movement in malabar witnessed destruction of government buildings, bridges, telephone lines, etc. kizhariyoor bomb case was one of the major incidents during this time. in this incidents, a police case was charged against 27 persons including k. b. menon and kunjiramakidavu, accusing them of conspiring to destroy the feroke bridge. battle of pookkottoor battle of pookkottoor was an important

protest that took place as part of the malabar rebellion when non - cooperation movement and khilafat movement were in full swing. the rebellion was related to the attempt of the british police to ar - rest vadakke veettil muhammed, the secretary of the khilafat committee, pookkoottoor, accusing of theft. the brit - ish government struggled a lot to suppress the rebellion in which about three thou - sand people participated. hundreds were murdered in the battle. chettoor sankaran nair chettoor sankaran nair from palakkad is the lone malayalee who became presi -

dent of the indian national congress. it was in the amaravati conference of 1897, he was elected the president. sankaran nair resigned his membership in viceroy ' s executive council as a pro - test against the jalianwala bagh mas - sacre. disagreeing with the gandhian ways of protest, chettoor wrote a book titled ' gandhi and anarchy. ' war song ( padappattu ) about the malabar rebellion ( hitchcock was the district police officer who suppressed the malabar re - bellion. the british government built a memorial for hitchcock. kambalath

govindan nair, who participated in the protest march to demolish the memorial, wrote this war song ( padappattu ). way back in 21, in this land of malayalam united we fought the forces of the white with the sons of eranad who shed blood facing battle tanks with bare chests kunhammadaji of variam kunnath led his team of souls moved by truth * * * reason for our fight was our objection to feeding the lords with our rice * * * reason for our fight was our objection to sending our assets to england * * * he did erect stone on our chest that pig killed our brothers?

you can see the dead hichcock ' s grave stone the real satan ' s tomb on the road of mongam miles away from manjeri * * * this land has brave patriots oh white men if you want to live long escape to england soon kerala towards modernity 165 pattom thanu pillai travancore in travancore, political agitations started in 1891 with the malayali memorial. under the leadership of barrister g. p pillai, a memorandum was submitted to the king signed by more than ten thousand people seeking proportionate representation for the people of travancore in government jobs. this mass

representation is known as the malayali memorial. in 1896, dr palpu submitted a memorial to the king raising the problems faced by the ezhava community. this is known as the ezhava memorial. the deportation of ramakrishna pillai, the editor of ' swadeshabhimani ', a newspaper for criticising the then dewan of travancore caused significant political breakthroughs in kerala. student agitations spread all over travancore. in 1932 christian, muslim and ezhava communities launched agitation seeking reservation in government jobs in proportion to their population. this was known as ' nivarthana

prakshobham ' ( abstention movement ). this was led by n v joseph, p k kunhu, and c keshavan. in 1938, with the formation of the travancore state congress with pattom thanu pillai as the president, political activities in travancore gained momentum. the punnapra - vayalar protest in 1946 against the administrative reforms of diwan sir c p ramaswamy iyer led the entry of the working class into the political arena. punnapra - vayalar " agitations for citizens ’ freedom in travancore started long before. agitations at punnapra and vayalar by the workers targeted citizens ’ freedom and popular

rule. the speed of freedom is ac - celerated by the massacres in punnapra and vayalar like the agitations at kadakkal, pangode, alappuzha and kollam that sup - ported the freedom struggle. " c. keshavan ( reference : c. keshavante prasangangal ) kerala towards modernity 166 kochi the struggle for responsible government in kochi began with the electricity agitation of 1936. the agitation was against the decision of the diwan shanmugam chetty to hand over the charge of electricity supply in kochi to a private company. the agitation for responsible government in kochi was not so strong as it was in

travancore. the formation of cochin rajya prajamandalam under the leadership of s. neelakanda iyer and v. r. krishnanezhuthachan in 1941 strengthened the movements. e. ikkanda warrier, panampalli govinda menon, and k ayyappan were among the leaders of cochin rajya prajamandalam. prepare a flow chart comprising the important political protests that took place in malabar, travancore and kochi. a v kuttimalu amma e. ikkanda warrier the economic system in our country is very unsatisfactory. the rich thrive on one side and 80 % of people suffer on the other side. our people live in starva -

tion and despair under this economic system. a regime cannot exist in travancore without changing this economic system. a situational evenness alone can change the economic system. travancore will survive only if the future travancore will be transformed into a socialist travancore. i don ' t think this change is possible only through bloodshed. economic justice, whichever it is, must be peaceful. source : speech of annie mascarene at the state congress committee held at the temple ground, varkala. ( selected speeches of freedom fighters, state archaeological department ) akkamma cherian

annie mascarene national movement and women read the excerpt of the speech given above. women actively participated in the political agitations and expressed their political views throughout kerala. women actively participated in boycotting foreign goods, picketing liquor shops, eradicating of untouchability, and popularising khadi. in 1931, as part of the congress conference at vatakara, a women conference was also organized. it is known to be the first women conference in kerala. a v kuttimalu amma from malabar, akkamma cherian, and annie mascarene from

travancore were prominent women leaders of the national movement. kerala towards modernity 167 towards united kerala malayalees were divided into three different administrative dispensations though they spoke the same language. the congress session held at nagpur in 1920 decided to set up state congress committees on lingustics basis. taking this into consideration, the first kerala state political conference was held at ottappalam from 23 - 26 april 1921. barrister t prakasam, known as andhra kesari, presided over the conference. later,

kerala pradesh congress committee came into existence uniting travancore, kochi and malabar regions. the payyannur congress conference chaired by jawaharlal nehru conceded a resolution demanding the reorganization of kerala as a distinctive state after the independence. the united kerala resolution was passed both in the the united kerala convention held at thrissur under k kelappan in 1947 and in the united kerala conference held at aluva after the independence. consequently, the state of thiru - kochi was formed on 1 july 1949 by joining travancore and kochi. e m s

namboothiripad in his book, ' onnekal kodi malayalikal, ' placed the idea that the kerala state was to be formed combining the malayalam speaking regions. the central government set up the state reorganization commission as the protests demanding lingustic - based states were on the high. the state of kerala came into existence on 1 november 1956 unifying e m s namboothiripad gandhiji about kaumudi " she took out one bangle and asked me if i would give my autograph. i was preparing to give it, when off came the other bangle. she had only one on each hand. i

said, " you need not give me both, i shall give you the autograph for one bangle only. " she replied by taking off her golden necklace. her hands automatically went to her ears and out came her jewelled ear - rings amid the ringing cheers of the public, whose expression of joy was no longer to be suppressed. ' ' as i handed her the autograph, i could not help prefacing it with the remark, " your renun - ciation is a truer ornament than the jewelry you have discarded. " kerala towards modernity 168 malabar, kochi and thriuvithamkur as per the recommendation of the commission.

agastheeswaram, thovala, kalkulam, and vilavancode taluks under travancore were merged with the madras state. the taluks of kasaragod and hosdurg in southern karnataka became part of kerala. prepare a magazine collecting information from various sources on the achievement of kerala in the field of land reform, public health, education, etc. analyse the circumstances that led to the formation of the united kerala. prepare a digital assignment on the various incidents that led to the formation of kerala state. pledge of united kerala we take oath to form one kerala from three pieces of it

millions of hearts bear this pledge millions of hands ready to fight let divine power and traditions to stop us if they dare let the callous repressive forces to face us if they dare we shall break all despotic rules we shall launch the reign of people one assembly, one law one government in our kerala n v krishna warrier kerala towards modernity 169 kerala towards modernity the potuguese the dutch the english the french pazhassi raja veluthampi paliathachan part of world market changes in land - relations commercialization of agriculture industrial growth education law health social reform

movements vaikkom satyagraha guruvayoor satyagraha temple entry proclamation non - cooperation movement civil disobedience movement quit india movement united kerala arrival of the europeans earlier resistances economic changes socio - cultural changes national movement match the following ab the portuguese attingal riot the dutch karnatic wars the french battle of colachal the british struggles of kunhali marakkars how did the english east india company get dominance in kerala? analyse the impact of the british rule on trade, industry, and agriculture in kerala.

kerala towards modernity 170 prepare the script and stage a drama on earlier protests such as attingal revolt, pazhassi revolt, and the battles of veluthampi and paliathachan against the british in kerala prepare a seminar paper on the changes in the culture of kerala during the british rule. points to be included are : printing and education health law and justice succession system make a digital album on reformation movements and protests for social change in kerala with the help of ict. complete the list by finding out the persons related to the events given

from the names given in brackets : - kundara proclamation … … … … … … … - vaikkom satyagraha … … … … … … … … - guruvayoor satyagraha … … … … … … - kizhariyur bomb case … … … … … … … - malayali memorial … … … … … … … ….. ( dr. palpu, g p pillai, pazhassi raja, k kelappan, k b menon, sree narayana guru, veluthampi dalawa, t k madhavan ) list out the reformation movements and protests developed in kerala to eradicate social evils and inequalities. national movement in kerala had no uniformity. find out the reasons. give a detailed account of the events that led to the united kerala.

given above is the response of the indian nurses from syria who were brought back to the country. they were held up in syria and were unable to reach home due to the internal conflicts there. you may aware of similar incidents. this proves that the protection of the life and property of the people, implementation of public welfare activities, and to effectively interfere in crucial situations as mentioned above can only be done by the state. hence, state is the most important among the socio - political institutions that human beings have formed.

" this is our second life. we never expected to " this is our second life. we never expected to " this is our second life. we never expected to " this is our second life. we never expected to " this is our second life. we never expected to return home alive. we thank government of indiareturn home alive. we thank government of indiareturn home alive. we thank government of indiareturn home alive. we thank government of indiareturn home alive. we thank government of india

and all others who worked to make our releaseand all others who worked to make our releaseand all others who worked to make our releaseand all others who worked to make our releaseand all others who worked to make our release possible. this is a moment when we are proud topossible. this is a moment when we are proud topossible. this is a moment when we are proud topossible. this is a moment when we are proud topossible. this is a moment when we are proud to be citizens of india. " be citizens of india. " be citizens of india. " be citizens of india. " be citizens of india. "

the state and political science 172 state is a universal, powerful and indispensable institution. it was formed after man started permanent settlement. we can understand from history that state existed at all times, though different in form and structure. the term ' state ' was first coined by the western philosopher nicholo machiavelli. what is state a group of people residing permanently within a particular territory with a sovereign government is called state. find out the basic factors of a state from the above definition. population population

population is an indispensable factor in the formation of a state. for the existence of a state, the people should live unitedly with mutual understanding, inter dependence and common public interest. there is no state without people. however, the minimum and the maximum number of people for a country are not fixed. population which is too much or too less is not good for a state. these two aspects will adversely affect the development of a state. states like canada with less population encourages migration. scarcity of human resource is

the reason for this. at the same time high population leads to unemployment and poverty. nicholo machiavelli evaluate how high population or low population affect a state. what do we understand from this? the people of a nation need not belong to any single religion, speak any particular language, or follow a particular culture. however, they should live unitedly with common nationalism. we have discussed in the earlier chapters what nationality is and how it influences a state. the state and political science 173 territory

observe the map of india and the information given below. details of land area and boundaries are given along with the map. territory is an important factor for the formation of a state. a state should have an exact territory with clearcut boundary. the state is formed when the people settle permanently in a particular territory. the state should have complete control over its territory. the land area, water bodies, coastal area, aerial space etc. within the boundaries are part of the territory. observe the political map of the world. you can see big countries like

russia, canada, america and small countries like san marino, vatican the state and political science 174 territorial waters the sea upto 12 nauti - cal miles ( 22km ) from the coast is considered a part of the territory of the country concerned. this area is known as territorial waters. coast guards can seize the ships and boats of other countries which enter this area without prior permission. kerala is not a country kerala has definite territory population and government. but it does not have the power to take decisions on all internal and external matters. hence kerala cannot

be considered as a country. city etc. the territorial size does not matter in the formation of a state. government the organs of government and the government in india have been discussed in earlier classes. government is an unavoidable constituent of a state. on behalf of the state, the government makes and executes law and ensures justice to the people. government ensures security and makes available different services to the people. some responsibilities of the government are given below. add more to the list. maintain law and order. increase employment opportunities.

implement developmental projects. the state reaches the people by executing such responsibilities. different states have different forms of government. monarchy, despotic rule, democracy etc. are the different forms of government you have discussed. whatever be the form the state should have a government. the government may change from time to time but the state remains permanent. sovereignty observe the news headlines given above. the decision and stand of the government of india on national and international issues are referred here. state has the right to take decisions on

the state and political science 175 national and international affairs independently without any external control. this supreme authority of a state is called sovereignty. sovereignty makes a state different from other institutions. a state cannot be constituted even if there is population, territory and government. along with these, sovereignty should also be there for a state to be formed. sovereignty is the absolute, unlimited and indivisible power of the state. it has two dimensions. sovereignty internal : the right to take decisions on all matters which come within its territory.

external : the right to take independent decisions on international issues. functions of a state the vision of the western political thinker jeremy bentham is given below. welfare of the people is the function of all states. greek philosophers like plato and aristotle considered the primary duty of a state is to provide better life to its citizens. states have numerous functions in modern times. along with the emergence of the concept of ' welfare state ', functions have also south sudan the division of sover - eign power may lead to the creation of new states. south sudan is

the latest example of this. in 2011 sudan got divided and formed a new state named south sudan. it is the 193rd member nation of uno. prepare a seminar paper on the essential factors of a state. the state and political science 176 prepare a short film on the various functions of state by collecting news and pictures related to it. increased accordingly. observe the chart showing the functions of state. from the given chart we can understand that some functions of state are obligatory and some others are discretionary. functions which have to be implemented by the state at all times at any

cost are said to be obligatory functions. state cannot abstain from its obligatory functions. the life and property of the people cannot be protected if the obligatory functions are not performed. what is the difference between obligatory functions and discretionary functions? discretionary functions are those which have to be implemented as per the economic condition of the state. implementation of functions like education, health care etc. will provide better living conditions for the people. the state which implements such progressive measures is called a welfare

state. it is not possible to set a limit to the discretionary powers of a state. the growth of technology and the increase in human wants are making this area vast. which are the institutions formed in india for the implementation of obligatory functions? list them out. critically analyse and discuss the obligatory and discretionary functions of state. the state and political science 177 origin of state look at some of the theories on the origin of state given below. state is the creation of god. king is the representative of god. king is answerable only to god. state is the product of

history. it was formed by social evolution. state came into existence as a result of a contract by the people. state was constituted for the fulfillment of human needs. state came into existence as a result of the establishment of power by the strong over the weak. from the theories given above the most acceptable is the theory of evolution. this theory tells us that state was formed as a result of several social circumstances and it reached its present form through the process of evolution. state started as tribe and tribal administration and later developed as city state, empire state and

feudal state. today states are commonly known as nation states because they are formed on the basis of a feeling of nationalism. state and citizen we have discussed earlier that population is an essential factor of state. the picture of a passport is given which is essential for an indian citizen to travel outside india. nationality is recorded in birth certificate, passport, etc. this reveals the citizenship of an individual. the state and political science 178 citizenship the point of view of the greek philosopher aristotle on citizenship is given above. the

relation between state and citizen is made clear in it. citizenship is the full and equal membership in a nation. citizenship enables a person to experience political and civil rights. observe the chart which shows the relationship between state and citizen. it is clear that while state ensures certain rights, citizens have certain duties to perform. the concept of citizenship gained importance when democracy came into existence. in the execution of administration, democracy ensures the participation of the citizens through political rights. only the citizens can enjoy

the political rights of a nation. are all the people living in a nation its citizens? apart from citizens, there may be foreigners. don ' t you know that many indian citizens are working abroad? foreigners do not have all the rights that citizens enjoy. certain rights which are available in india exclusively to its citizens are given below. add more. larry baker born in 1917 in the city of burmingham in britain, baker reached india in 1945 as a part of a leprosy mission. he was very much in - fluenced by the prin - ciples of gandhiji. he demon - strated cost effective house con -

struction method in kerala. he is known as gandhiji in the field of architecture. larry baker re - ceived indian citizenship in 1989. he passed away in 2007. he be - came an indian citizen through acquired citizenship. political rights the right to vote, the right to con - test in elections, the right to form organisations, the right to criticise government, the right to hold public office etc. are po - litical rights. the state and political science 179 right to contest election do all the citizens of a nation get their citizenship in the same manner?

there are two types of citizenship. observe the chart given below. according to the definition of aristotle political science is the study of institutions like state and government. aristotle gave the name ' politics ' to his book dealing with political issues. this is the first book which makes a comprehensive analysis of state. hence he is known as the father of political science. the contributions of socrates and citizenship by birth is natural citizenship. when a person acquires citizenship on the basis of the legal procedure of a nation, it is acquired

citizenship. one can acquire citizenship, if the criteria of citizenship are fulfilled. political science so far we were discussing different concepts related to state. the study of state and government started from ancient times itself. as political aspects are connected with man ' s day to day affairs, they need comprehensive analysis and study. political science came into existence as an area of study connected with state. analyse the definition given by greek philosopher aristotle on political science. the state and political science 180 collect pictures and contributions of political

thinkers, prepare a powerpoint presentation and introduce it in your class. plato also helped in the origin of political science. the word ' politics ' was derived from the greek word ' polis ' which means ' city state '. at first political science took up the study of institutions like state and government and its functioning. as the democratic system emerged, the concept of political participation also gained prominence. as a result, in addition to the study of political institutions, the study of political processes also became a part of political science. the field of study of political

science is continuously expanding. observe the different branches of study of political science in the given diagram. you are now familiar with the main branches of political science. apart from these four branches of study, all concepts related to political processes are also discussed as a part of political science. why study political science should the study of political science and politics be kept apart? should we actively involve in politics? see the view of plato in this regard. this viewpoint of plato has great significance in democratic

societies. the merit of the society in which we live is based on how much we involve in the political process of that society. we need to logically analyse and creatively intervene in all public issues. political science helps you in this. the state and political science 181 the state and political science state functionsof state origin of state state and citizen political science people territory governmentsovereignty obligatory discrea - tionary divine right theory evolutionary theory social contract theory power theory

what is meant by state? what are the essential elements of a state? explain the internal and external levels of sovereignty. what are the obligatory and discretionary functions of a state? what are the different theories related to the origin of state? what is citizenship? note down the difference between citizen and a foreigner. explain natural and acquired citizenships? what is political science? who is known as the father of political science.? a ) aristotle b ) plato c ) socrates d ) kautilya the state and political science 182

collect the pictures of important political thinkers and prepare an album with suitable captions. analyse the works of eminent political thinkers and prepare notes. prepare a list of the welfare programmes being implemented by government of india and prepare a note showing their significance. observe the above given pictures and read the descriptions. the descriptions are about hajjabba who contributed immensely to the education of a village and kallen pokkudan who worked for environmental conservation through

the protection of mangroves. their contributions were in the fields of their own choice, for the well being of the society. civic consciousness 184 collect more information about them and discuss with your co - learners. their lives give the noble message that even ordinary people can undertake great activities. divergent thinking, selfless activities, awareness about the problems of the society and fellow beings and willingness to serve are the factors that prompt them forward. creation of a great society requires creative attitudes and values in

all individuals. every individual in the modern society is known as citizen. civic consciousness is the recognition that each citizen is for the society and the genuine interests of the society are the interests of the citizen. those who have civic consciousness will always be ready to work for the society. importance of civic consciousness civic consciousness influences the progress of the state and society. in the absence of civic consciousness human beings will become selfish and all the activities will be for his own achievements. this will

adversely affect social life. in such a society there will be no peace or security. observe the given news titles. certain problems faced by the society are mentioned in them. can the state alone find solutions to these problems? the collective action of the people and their cooperation is essential for this. certain problems faced by the society and the solutions are given. expand the table by writing more solutions. collect information about the person who aorked for the general goodness of society and schedule the common features civic consciousness 185 prepare a short film on

areas such as environmental protection and awareness against corruption and present it in the classroom. from this we can understand that civic consciousness will help to solve many problems faced by the society. for ensuring the welfare of all and the reconstruction of the society civic consciousness has to be developed. it help the society to reconstruct from the crisis and recover from insecurity. the unanimous volunteer ship of all section of the people at the time of devouring deluge of 2018 helped the people of kerala to survive.

the basis of civic consciousness is the recognition that if the activities of each individual are for the wellbeing of the society, social problems can be solved. factors determining civic consciousness formation of civic consciousness is determined by life situations and experiences. the life situation of each individual provides different experiences and hence there will be variation in civic consciousness. the important factors which determine civic consciousness are given below. family education social system associations political system problems what can we do?

water scarcity effective utilisation of water environmental pollution garbage treatment at source flood shifting the residence in safe zone corruption awareness against corruption civic consciousness 186 prepare a blog on the various activities conducted in your school. discuss how different life situations help in moulding civic consciousness. find out the personalities whose civic consciousness was formulated due to the influence of either positive or negative situations and list them. each of the above factors influences civic consciousness. these factors

mould an individual ' s thought and actions. not only favourable circumstances, but certain negative and challenging situations will also be helpful in moulding strong civic consciousness in an individual. discuss how family influences the formation of civic consciousness. education the primary aim of education is to equip the individual to effectively utilise the knowledge gained through the learning of different subjects for the betterment of society. education will help to develop value consciousness, tolerance, leadership qualities, scientific temper, etc.

through education, science and technology can be effectively utilised how can we foster civic consciousness? it is essential to create and maintain civic consciousness. deliberate effort is necessary to foster civic consciousness. all societies undertake positive measures to foster civic consciousness. only through creative intervention in society can civic consciousness be fostered in all individuals. some factors are given below. family we learn to respect the elders and to engage in social service from the primary social institution of family. family has an important role in

fostering and maintaining sense of responsibility among its members. inspiration and encouragement from the family will develop civic consciousness. the concept that each individual is for the family and the family is for the society should be developed in the family atmosphere. civic consciousness 187 in a useful manner to the society. through value - oriented educational approach we can instill civic consciousness among the people. government formulates educational policies with this aim. what are the activities which your school can undertake for the formulation

of civic consciousness? prepare an annual calendar of these activities and implement them accordingly. prepare an album with news and pictures reflecting civic consciousness. associations there are several political, social, economic and cultural associations in our society. such associations many a time equip the individuals to work voluntarily with a service mind. several voluntary associations are working in the fields of protection of environment, protection of human rights, charity, etc. these associations can create awareness among individuals about

environment and human rights. media media plays an important role in the formulation of civic consciousness. print and electronic media influences the society trenedously. news and information reach the masses through the media. judicious and objective information lead to the formulation of creative ideas. media should be independent and impartial. the information from the media should be evaluated critically. democratic system democracy is an inevitable component of civic consciousness. democracy is the basis of all other components which help to develop

civic consciousness. it is a way of life more than a form of government. all our activities should have a democratic approach. living in co - operation is essential for a democratic society. giving back the co - civic consciousness 188 operation and support received from others is a great sign of democratic consciousness. democracy prompts individuals to think about fellow beings and to work for the protection of their freedom, equality and rights. democracy believes in the rule of law which mean all are subject to law in a democracy. familiaraisation of role models a. p. j. abdul

kalam mother theresa mayilamma dasaradh manchi observe the pictures. they are some personalities with ideal civic consciousness, who gave valuable contribution to the society. find their areas of action and contributions. while working in different areas they exhibited humanity, love towards fellow beings and duty consciousness. everyone should work in their own areas of activity with magnanimity and dedication. if every individual is made to think and work in such a manner then only social progress is possible. you might have participated in organic farming, traffic awareness

programmes, activities against drug abuse, and philanthropic activities. it indicates your civic consciousness. list out the activities that can be undertaken in schools for developing civic consciousness. civic consciousness and morality gandhiji ' s views on morality in different dimensions of human life are given below. the basis of all activities is morality. what is morality? morality means the ability to recognize virtues from vices, accept virtues and to perform duties with utmost responsibility. it is civic consciousness 189

morality helps civic consciousness, whereas immorality destroys it. creation of moral consciousness in all walks of life is the most effective way to foster civic consciousness. civic consciousness is a creative state of mind. certain activities with civic consciousness and without civic consciousness are given below. put a tick mark ( ) against the statements which reflect civic consciousness and a cross mark ( ) against the statements without civic consciousness. the moral responsibility of each individual to perform the duty towards the society and the state.

$ politics without principles $ wealth without work $ science without humanity $ commerce without morality $ education without character $ worship without sacrifice $ pleasure without conscience. all these things are extremely dangerous gandhiji gandhiji ' s view on morality evaluate our thoughts and actions. find out and schedule the acceptable and unacceptable actions civic consciousness absence of civic consciousness obey traffic rules even if you are busy. there is nothing wrong in disposing garbage in public places. it is my duty to protect historical monuments.

it is my duty to protect nature. don ' t complain against injustice. corruption is permissible during crucial situations. respect and protect aged people. statement civic consciousness 190 we can also undertake certain activities the student community with civic con - sciousness can undertake many ideal ac - tivities. some of them are given. find out more activities. giving consent letter for organ donation blood donation participation in the activities of spc, ncc, scouts and guides, clubs, etc. keep public places clean. give first aid to victims of accidents.

help the differently abled and the aged. civic consciousness : challenges the main challenge faced by civic consciousness is the mindset to do anything for the sake of one ' s own personal interest, by negating public interest. how can we overcome this challenge? each one should evaluate his activities critically. should work for one ' s interest without going against public interest. be the change which you expect from others. equal weight should be given to both rights and duties. individuals should act democratically and tolerably. undertake more activities and

develop attitudes like this which will help to overcome challenges of civic consciousness. social science learning and civic consciousness social science learning has a major role in the formulation of civic consciousness. social science, as an area of study which is very close to the society and human beings, envisages comprehensive changes in every individual. let us examine how social science learning can be utilised for the formulation of civic consciousness. equips the individuals to respect diversity and to behave with tolerance.

helps to understand the different contexts of political, social, economic and environmental problems. equips the individual to suggest comprehensive solutions to different problems. disseminate the message of peace and co - operation to the society. makes the individual civic conscious and action oriented by familiarising the ideal models and activities of civic consciousness. civic consciousness 191 civic consciousness importance determining factors methods to foster civic consciousness civic consciousness and morality civic consciousness challenges social science learning and civic

consciousness you might have understood that for the growth, development and sustainable existence of a society civic consciousness is very essential. but it is difficult to develop civic consciousness in all individuals. the easiest way to accomplish this great mission is by ourselves becoming civic conscious. what is meant by civic consciousness? what are the important factors that formulate civic consciousness? list out the features which we can see in persons with civic consciousness. explain the role of morality in fostering civic consciousness.

civic consciousness help in solving the problems faced by society? substantiate with examples. give examples of certain ideal models who have high sense of civic consciousness. explain the role of family, education and media in fostering civic consciousness. suggest methods for overcoming the challenges faced by civic consciousness. prepare a note on social science learning and civic consciousness. civic consciousness 192 collect information about role models who have high sense of civic consciousness and prepare an album.

find out and list the various things which students can do in different fields as an expression of civic consciousness. find out the challenges faced by the society without civic consciousness and prepare a report. this is a part of the novel nalukettu by the famous writer m. t. vasudevan nair. the changes in the customs of the joint family system in kerala are depicted from the view of a child. appunni started later than usual for the school. his gruel was delayed. for some days he had not been getting food on time. all the paddy had been utilised

completely. valyammama sold all the paddy in the granary to the truckers. when asked for paddy, he would mouth only bad words so he disgusting to hear. he would be rarely at home. if he went to poonthottam, then he would return only after plucking arecanuts and coconuts. he behaved as if taking care of the household was not at all his responsibility. kuttammama also is no better. he is also not bothered about providing food for the family. when he comes home, if there is no food on time, he scolds meenakshiyedathi. it is she who borrows paddy and rice from

the neighbouring houses. she often murmurs " it ' s all my fate. ' ' ( nalukettu ) m. t. vasudevan nair sociology : what? why? 194 ancestral homes were becoming more and more helpless in managing financial crisis. big joint families might have received profit due to the rise in price of their left over paddy. however, this also became the cause for fights and difference of opinion in the family. regarding small joint families, the abolition of slavery, the rise in the wages of labourer and the rise in the price of paddy weakened the financial condition. moreover, members

of the ancestral homes gave importance to their self interests more than the interests of the joint family. robin jeffrey ( the decline of nair dominance ) nalukettu decline of the nair dominance the literary genre - novel research study imaginative objective emotional response logical analysis though m. t. and jeffrey are dealing with the same topic, their observations are different. the personal experience and imagination of m. t are the basis for his conclusions in nalukettu. jeffrey has come to his conclusions after analysing the collected data in a scientific way.

let ' s examine the difference in the ways adopted by them. let ' s examine the findings of robin jeffrey, a sociologist, on the same things. let ' s examine the difference between creative writing and the study of sociology. creative writing study of sociology writing is based on imagination and social issues / subjects are analysed creativity scientifically social events are depicted on social conditions are analysed on the aesthetic realms basis of cause - effect relationship the goal of creative writing is society is objectively analysed. appreciation sociology : what? why? 195

the world of social sciences history, geography, economics, political science, anthropology, psychology, etc. are different branches of social science. analyse the following table and try to find out the names of the branches of social science connected with them. discuss the difference between creative writing and the study of sociology. study of economic activities.............................................. inquiry into the past and the culture.............................................. study of the state and the rights of the people.

.............................................. study of the origin and racial evolution of man.............................................. study of human mind and behaviour............................................... the branches of knowledge which you have recognised undertake the study of a particular facet of society. sociology is a distinct subject area which undertakes a comprehensive study of the relation between man and his social environment. the early social science thinkers we have already discussed the french revolution in the previous

chapters. the social issues in france after the revolution led to the rise of sociology. the 19th century is known in history as the ' age of revolutions '. three revolutions paved the way for the emergence of sociology. through group discussion find out and present the areas of study of the different branches of social science. sociology : what? why? 196 renaissance or scientific revolution. french revolution industrial revolution. sociology originated in western europe in the background of these revolutions. auguste comte the french thinker is regarded as the

father of sociology. herbert spencer was the thinker who utilised the theory of evolution by charles darwin for the study of the society. he clarified that just as biological evolution, the society had passed through various stages and reached the present stage. many thinkers like karl marx, emile durkheim, max weber, etc. have made important contributions to the development of sociology. sociology in india sociology has reached different countries through the work of early sociologists. the study of sociology started in india during the

beginning of the 20th century. a department for sociology was first started in the university of bombay. g. s. khurey, a. r. desai, s. c. dubey, m. n. sreenivas, d. p. mukharjee, etc. have made valuable contributions to the study of sociology in india. what is sociology? sociology is the scientific study of thesociology is the scientific study of thesociology is the scientific study of thesociology is the scientific study of thesociology is the scientific study of the

social aspects of human life. social aspects of human life. social aspects of human life. social aspects of human life. social aspects of human life. what do you understand from this definition of sociology? sociology studies human life. sociology is the scientific study of the mutual relationship between man and his environment. that is why sociology is considered as a comprehensive study of society. g. s. khurey d. p. mukharjee m. n. sreenivas auguste comte herbert spencer sociology : what? why? 197 why the study of sociology? helps to formulate the right perspective of society.

helps to get an objective knowledge of one ' s society and other societies. helps to know the relation between the individual and the social institutions. studies social problems precisely. helps to find solution for social problems. benefits social planning and development. provides guidance to social welfare measures by conducting studies on the backward sections, the exploited and people who have faced discrimination and oppression. discuss the importance of the study of sociology. areas in sociology the scope of sociology is vast. it is not only the study of inter

relationship between individuals and events but also the problems like unemployment, communal conflicts, problems of the villagers, poverty, etc,. the main areas of sociology are : social institutions social groups social relations socialisation social control communities social changes social problems. sociology : what? why? 198 the scientific study of these fields comes under the purview of sociology. methods of study in sociology studies in sociology are conducted for educational and practical purposes. sociology employs a variety of methods in such studies.

let us see some of them. social survey you might have heard of census. how often does census take place in india? what are the features of census? census is a type of survey which collects details about the total population of a nation. survey is the most suitable method for the study of sociology. it helps to formulate a comprehensive point of view of the topic, based on the data collected from a group of selected people. survey method is used when data is to be collected from a larger population. but census is not practical in sociological studies, because usually data

is not collected from all the people under study but only from a selected group of people. such studies are called sample survey. different means are used to collect data during a survey. you must have seen data collection through social media and telephone. questionnaires are commonly used in social surveys. a questionnaire is a set of questions that researchers use to collect data. questionnaires are given to the respondents from whom data is collected. the group under study is called respondents. study is carried out using the respondents ' responses in the questionnaire.

sociology : what? why? 199 suppose you want to conduct a survey of the reading habit of the students of your school. what are the questions to be included in the questionnaire? the kind of information to be collected should be decided in advance. you can collect the information listed below. what is the percentage with reading habits in general? popular books and periodicals. what is the average time spent on reading newspapers? what is the average time spent every week on reading books? age - wise categorisation of readers. prepare a questionnaire so as to get the above information.

interview haven ' t you noticed the interviews held by media? interview is an important method used to collect information in sociology. this is a method by which information is collected orally. interview is the talk between the interviewer and the interviewee. as a method of study interview helps to know and analyse the attitudes, views, beliefs, habits, etc. of the individuals. in an interview certain things are to be taken care of : identifying the apt persons. formulating an idea of the information to be collected. preparing of suitable questions effective communication.

management of time proper organisation of the information collected and preparing the report. there are some differences between an interview and a questionnaire. let ' s examine them. sociology : what? why? 200 information is collected orally information is given in writing researcher records the the respondent information provides information interview questionnaire observation as in all other scientific researches, observation is the basic method of study in sociology also. it is more relevant where methods like

interview are not practically feasible. observation is a method by which whatever is seen, heard and experienced is recorded truthfully. information thus collected directly helps in correct assessment. there are two types of observation. 1. participant observation 2. non participant observation when the researcher himself / herself collects information directly from the area under study it is called participant observation. this is a popular method in sociology. the sociologist stays with the population under study and understands their life directly in such

observation. the researcher learns their language, culture, etc. and becomes a part of their daily life. through this method even the behaviour which are not explicit can be studied. this method is also known as field work. the participant observation method is mostly employed by anthropologists to study early human societies. in non participant observation, the researcher does not stay with the group under study. they are observed from outside. conduct an interview with elected representatives in your locality - in connection with pollution and related problem sociology : what? why? 201

collect examples of various sociological study methods and give a powerpoint presentation. visit an institution in your locality ( eg. bank, factory, market ) and note down how it functions through observation. case study case study is used to make an in - depth study on rare and different social phenomena and problems. such studies will be exact and comprehensive. the topic under study using this method is called a case. the detailed study of the case is case study. sociology uses case study for collecting data. sociology uses different research methods to make indepth and

vast study of the different aspects of the present complex society. sociology has developed into a branch of science which is effective in the day - to - day affairs of the society. sociologists who are experienced in research are needed in various fields like administration and planning. sociology has the applicability in commcerce town planning, advertisements, media and educational activities. sociology helps in giving a fundamental idea of social life, thereby broadening our perspectives. the difference between creative writing and sociology sociology methods of study

sociology : what? why? sociology - origin, early sociologists, features of the study of sociology social survey, interview, observation, case study how far the soci - ologist has the possibilities in the field of com - merce, town plan - ning, advertise - ments, media and educational activi - ties. sociology : what? why? 202 how is creative writing different from the study of sociology? what is meant by sociology? why do we study sociology? name the early sociologists. which are the important areas in sociology? what are the objectives of the study of sociology?

how do social survey a major methodology of sociology help to understand the society? differentiate between observation and interview. prepare a questionnaire of a minimum of 10 questions to collect data on the transport problems faced by your friends to reach the school. what are the practical applications of sociology? prepare a report on the problems of aged people with the help of an interview with them. prepare an album with the pictures of the famous sociologists. security features of a genuine indian currency note

printing and circulation of forged notes are offences under sections 489a to 489e of the indian penal code and are punishable in the courts of law by fine or imprisonment or both. paper banknotes are printed on special watermarked paper with substrate cotton and cotton rag. this gives the banknotes a unique “ touch feel ” and “ crackling sound ”. watermark the portrait of mahatma gandhi, the multi - directional lines and an electrolyte mark showing the denomination value appear in thi s section and these can be viewed better when the banknote is held against light. security thread

all banknotes carry a security thread, partially exposed and partially embedded, with readable window. the security thread of notes up to rs 500 denomination contains “ bharath ” in hindi and “ rbi ” in english alternately. rs 1000 denomination notes additionally contain “ 1000 ” as a numeral in the security thread. micro lettering the letters “ rbi ” and the denomination value as a numeral can be viewed with the help of a magnifying glass in the zone between the portrait of mahatma gandhi and the right vertical band. ( however, only letters “ rbi ” is seen in rs. 10 denomination ).

intaglio printing the name reserve bank of india, the guarantee clause, the promise clause, the signature of rbi governor, the portrait of mahatma gandhi, the reserve bank seal, the ashoka pillar emblem, the central denomination value in words and figures are printed in intaglio, i. e., in raised prints which can be felt by touch. fluorescence the number panels of banknotes are printed in fluorescent link. optically variable ink the colour of the denomination in numeral appears green when the note is held flat and changes to blue when the note is held at an angle. the font

size also appears reduced. this feature is available only on notes of rs. 500 and rs. 1000 denominations. latent image the vertical band contains the denomination in numeral. this can be seen by keeping the note flat on the palm of your hand at eye level and viewing it against the light. we have to know more about currency notes used for financial transactions. genuine currency notes have certain security features. awareness of those features can save us from being duped. fundamental duties - it shall be the duty of every citizen of india :

01. seasons and time. 07 02. in search of the source of wind. 21 03. human resource deve l opment in india. 37 04. landscape analysis thr ough maps 51 05. public expenditure and public revenue. 75 7 seasons and time you have just read a brief note on the seasonal changes. we experience the recurrence of winter, summer and rainy seasons one after the other. such a change on the earth is known as seasonal change. the wonders of seasonal change exhibited by the nature are varied. winter is the season where everything is buried in snow. as the winter retreats, the grass and

trees slowly turn green. the spring season arrives with leaves and flowers in different hues. then summer sets in, bidding adieu to the reign of spring. comes the long rainy season as a relief to the scorching summer and then follows the autumn. trees start shedding their leaves within a few weeks in preparation to welcome the forthcoming winter. and the winter returns. months of severe cold then. such astonishing visuals that the nature prepares are more pronounced in the mid latitudes. while it is noon at one place it is midnight elsewhere. two different

days but at the same time on the earth! just like the wonders of the seasons, the sequence of time is also diverse. 8seasons and time why seasons change? you have learnt that there is periodic variation in the amount of sunshine over different places in both the hemispheres of the earth. why does this happen? variations in the amount of sunshine are the important special feature of the different seasons. the earth ' s revolution and the tilt of the axis are the reasons for this variation. you know that it is in an elliptical orbit that the earth revolves around the sun.

this is known as revolution. how much time does the earth take to complete one revolution? what is a leap year? you have learnt in the previous classes that the axis of the earth is tilted at an angle of 66½° from the orbital plane. if measured from the vertical plane this would be 23½° ( fig. 1. 1 ). the earth maintains this tilt throughout its revolution ( fig 1. 2 ). this is known as the parallelism of the earth ' s axis. sun and earth : near and far the distance between the earth and the sun will vary continuously throughout the period of one revolution. the days on which the

sun and the earth are nearest and farthest are shown in the diagram. these days are known as perihelion and aphelion respec - tively. perihelion 152 million km aphelion 147 million km july 4january 3 night day fig 1. 1 north pole south pole orbital plane sun rays 66½° 23½° antarctic circle tropic of capricorn equator tropic of cancer arctic circle 9 seasons and time observe the parallelism of the earth ' s axis from the diagram ( fig. 1. 2 ). since the parallelism is maintained same throughout the revolution, the position of the sun in relation to the earth varies apparently

between tropic of cancer ( 23½° north ) and tropic of capricorn ( 23½° south ). this is known as the apparent movement of the sun. the apparent movement of the sun, due to the inclination of axis, is the reason for the occurrence of seasons. look at fig. 1. 2. four different positions of the earth during a single revolution ( one year ) around the sun are depicted in it. there is variation in the sunlight that falls on the earth due to the apparent movement of the sun. the sun ' s rays fall vertically over one hemisphere during one half of the year and on the other hemisphere, during the other half.

temperature will be higher over those places where the vertical rays of the sun fall. the temperature will be low at places where the sun ' s rays are slanting. seasons and apparent movement of the sun as a result of the apparent movement of the sun between tropic of cancer ( 23½°n ) and tropic of capricorn ( 23½°s ), the different seasons - spring, summer, autumn and winter - get repeated in a cyclic manner. seasonal changes are not usually very obvious in the tropical regions because of the incidence of large amount of sun ' s rays throughout the year. september december march june fig 1. 2

10seasons and time characteristics of different seasons are clearly felt in the mid latitudinal or temperate zones. seasons are not distinctly felt in kerala. why? fig 1. 3 the frigid zones do not experience all the seasons. discuss the reason. equal amount of sunlight is received in the northern hemisphere as well as in the southern hemisphere when the sun is vertically over the equator. the apparent position of the sun during the earth ' s revolution will be over the equator on march 21 and september 23. hence the length of day and night will be equal during these days on both the hemispheres

( fig. 1. 3 ). these days are called equinoxes. from 21 march onwards, the sun apparently shifts from the equator northwards and reaches vertically over the tropic of cancer ( 23½°n ) on 21 june. this day is known as the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere. on this day the northern hemisphere experiences its longest day and shortest night. what is the peculiarity of the day and the night in the southern hemisphere on 21 june? the northern hemisphere generally experiences spring season between 21 march and 21 june. spring is the season of transition from winter to summer.

haven ' t you noticed the plants sprouting, mango trees blooming and jackfruit trees bearing buds and the like? these are the peculiarities of spring season. read table 1. 1 and identify the season in the southern hemisphere during this period. fig 1. 4 11 seasons and time fig 1. 5 fig 1. 7 fig 1. 6 the southward apparent movement of the sun begins from 21 june and again reaches vertically above the equator on 23 september. summer season is experienced in the northern hemisphere during this period. what are the changes observed in nature during the summer season?

the sun continues its southward apparent shift from the equator from 23 september and reaches vertically above tropic of capricorn ( 23½°s ) on 22 december. this day is known as winter solstice in the northern hemisphere. on this day the northern hemisphere experiences its shortest day and longest night. what is the peculiarity of the day and the night in the southern hemisphere on 22 december? it is autumn season in the northern hemisphere from 23 september to 22 december. autumn marks the transition from the severity of summer towards winter. during this period, the

atmospheric temperature decreases considerably. there is shortening of day and lengthening of night during the period. this is the season during which the trees generally shed their leaves. the shedding of leaves is a form of adaptation to survive the forthcoming dry winter. what is the season in the southern hemisphere, when it is autumn in the northern hemisphere? ( see table 1. 1 ) the northward apparent shift of the sun begins by 22 december and again reaches vertically above the equator on 21 march. this period marks the winter season in the northern hemisphere.

what are the peculiarities of winter season? which will be the season in the southern hemisphere when it is winter in the northern hemisphere? observe table 1. 1 and find out. 12seasons and time traditional seasons of india though the indian seasons are generally classified into four, it is estimated that there are six seasons in india based on the changes in the atmospheric con - ditions. vasantha - march, april greeshma - may, june varsha - july - august sarat - september, october hemanta - november, december sisira - january, february the apparent

months movement of the sun northern southern hemisphere hemisphere from march 21 to from the equator to tropic spring autumn june 21 of cancer from june 21 tofrom tropic of cancer summer winter september 23 to the equator from september 23 from the equator to autumn spring to december 22 t ropic of capricon from december 22 from tropic of capricon w inter summer to march 21 to the equator seasons table 1. 1 utharayanam and dakshinayanam you might have understood the apparent movement of the sun and the resultant seasons in both the hemispheres. following the winter

solstice, the sun sets its northward apparent movement from tropic of capricorn ( 23½°s ) and it culminates on tropic of cancer ( 23½°n ) on 21 june. this northward apparent movement of the sun from tropic of capricorn to tropic of cancer is termed as ' utharayanam '. the duration of day in the northern hemisphere gradually increases during this period. following the summer solstice, the sun sets its southward apparent movement from tropic of cancer ( 23½°n ) and it culminates on tropic of capricorn ( 23½°s ) on 22 december. this southward apparent movement of the sun from

tropic of cancer to tropic of capricorn is termed as ' dakshinayanam '. what is the change that occurs in the duration of day in the southern hemisphere during ' dakshinayanam '? during the period from march to september, as the sun is in the northern hemisphere, the north polar regions experience continuous daylight for six months. st andard x 13 seasons and time during the remaining period, that is from september to march, as the sun is in the southern hemisphere north polar regions experience continuous night for six months. what is the duration of day and night in the south polar

regions, when the sun is respectively over the northern hemisphere and southern hemisphere? rotation and calculation of time i looked at the clock - it was showing 12. the air hostess announced that we should set all our watches back by five and a half hours. as per our watches it was 5. 30 indian standard time. one could say the aircraft was flying towards the west, literally swallowing our indian standard time! we had to turn back the hands of our watches every now and then accordingly. translated from s k pottekkat ' s pathirasooryante naattil ( " in the land of the midnight sun " )

hope you read the extract from " pathira sooryante naattil ", the famous travelogue by the renowned author s. k. pottekkatt. aren ' t you now convinced that time in other countries is different from the time in india. let ’ s examine the reason behind this difference. in the ancient period, time was calculated based on the apex position of the sun and the length of the shadow cast by it. when the sun is vertically overhead, it is noon. thus the time estimated at each place, based on the position of the sun, is termed as the local time. is the local time in all the indian states the same?

the midnight sun the sun shines even at midnight! not for a single day, but for six months throughout, in the arctic and the antarctic circles. but don ' t think that the sun will be vertically overhead during those days. the sun can be seen only on the horizon. the remaining six months are shrouded in darkness. daylight lasts only for one or two hours. the land will be cov - ered with snow. human life and limited ag - riculture here are all scheduled according to the peculiarities of this climate. nt - 483 - 2 - soc. sci. - ii - 10 - e - vol. 1 14seasons and time fig 1. 8

what will be the hardships if there are several local times in a country? cannot prepare a railway time table applicable throughout the country. cannot give announcements about radio programs. later on, the calculation of time became more scientific and accurate. let ’ s go into the details of time calculation. the people of which indian state can see the sun rise first? you know that the earth rotates on its axis while it revolves. you have also learnt that day and night occur due to rotation. look at some of the facts associated with rotation. the earth rotates from west to east

( fig. 1. 10 ). it takes 24 hours to complete one rotation. as the earth rotates from west to east, the sun rises in the east. the angular distance of the earth is 360°. we will get 360 longitudes if we draw one longitude each for each degree of angular distance. the time required to complete a 360° rotation is 24 hours. on converting 24 hours into minutes 24 60 = 1440 minutes that is, the time required for the completion of one rotation = 1440 minutes the time required for the earth to complete the rotation of 1° longitude is 1440 360 = 4 minutes. 15 seasons and time

the time required for the rotation of 15° longitudinal area is 15 4 = 60 minutes ( 1 hour ). in otherwords, 15° longitudinal area of the earth passes by the sun within a period of one hour. as the earth rotates from west to east, time advances towards the east and recedes towards the west. look at the illustration. from a definite longitude, the time is estimated to increase by 4 minutes towards the east and decrease by 4 minutes towards the west for every degree of longitude. greenwich time ( gmt ) and time zones the zero degree longitude is known as the greenwich meridian.

it acquires its name from greenwich, the place where the royal british observatory is situated ( fig. 1. 9 ) and through which this line passes. time is calculated worldwide based on the greenwich line. hence this line is also known as the prime meridian. the local time at the prime meridian is known as the greenwich mean time. based on the greenwich merdian, the world is divided into 24 zones, each with a time difference of one hour. these are known as time zones. 11. 56 am 1° west 1° east 0° 12 noon 12. 4 pm fig1. 9 what would be the longitudinal extent of each time zone? standard time

the local time would be different at each longitude. if we start calculating the local time at different places based on the longitude there, it would create a lot of confusion. to solve this, the local time at the longitude that passes through the middle of a country is selected as the common time for the whole country. each country in the world considers the longitude that passes almost through its middle as the standard meridian. the countries with large longitudinal extent estimates more than one local time by considering more than one standard meridian. the

local time at the standard meridian is the standard time of that country. 16seasons and time indian standard time ( ist ) the longitudinal extent of india is from 68°e to 97°e. the 82½°e longitude which passes almost through the middle of these longitudes has been fixed as the standard meridian of india. the local time along this longitude is generally considered as the standard time of india. this is known as the indian standard time. find the difference between the indian standard time and the greenwich mean time. international date line

calculate the time at each 15° longitude east and west of the greenwich line up to 180° longitude and complete the table. time at greenwich - friday 10 a. m. to the west of greenwich to the east of greenwich longitude day time longitude day time 150 friday 9 am 15 0 friday 11 am 300 friday 8 am 30 0 friday 12 noon 450 450 600 600 750 750 900 900 1050 1050 1200 1200 1350 1350 1500 1500 1650 1650 1800 1800 table 1. 2 17 seasons and time you might have noticed that there is a diffence of 24 hours, at 180° longitude to the east and west of greenwich. the place ‘ a ’ marked in the given figure

( fig. 1. 10 ) is located at 180° longitude. which day would it be for those residing at place ‘ a ’ in fig. 1. 10? if 180° longitude passes through a country, the places situated east and west of this line will be having two different days. think about the practical difficulties caused by this. to avoid this, certain necessary adjustments have been effected in this line with the result that it doesn ’ t pass through the corresponding land areas. note the longitude marked with broken lines. the line is in such a way that it passes through

bering - strait in pacific ocean and avoid some of the inhabited islands. the travellers who cross this line from the west calculate the time by advancing it by one day and those who cross the line from the west deduct one day. this imaginary line is known as the international date line. note the international date line marked on the globe. identify the continents situated to the east and the west of this line. the travellers to which of these continents will gain one day on crossing the international date line? let ’ s calculate time example 1

what will be the time in india when it is 12 noon at greenwich? let us see how the time of india is calculated : the longitudinal difference between india and greenwich = 82°30 fig 1. 10 0° 82°30e greenwich india 18seasons and time the time difference for 15° longitude = 1 hour the time difference for 82°30 longitude = = 5½ hours = 5 hours 30 minutes as india is located to the east of greenwich, the time in india will be 5 hours and 30 minutes ahead of greenwich mean time. therefore the time at india = time at greenwich time difference = 12 noon + 5 hours 30 minutes = 5. 30 pm

example 2. what will be the time in japan ( 135° east ) when it is 11 pm on monday in india? the longitudinal difference between india and japan = 135° - 82°30 = 52°30 time difference for 1° longitude is 4 minutes. time difference for 52°30 longitude = 52½ 4 = 210 minutes = 3 hours 30 minutes 82°30 india 135° east japan 19 seasons and time as japan is situated at the east of india, the time in japan would be 3 hours and 30 minutes ahead of that time in india. when it is 11 pm on monday in india, the time in japan = 11 pm monday + 3 hours 30 minutes = 2. 30 am tuesday

let us assess identify the factor not responsible for the occurrence of seasons. a. revolution of the earth b. tilt of the earth ' s axis c. parallelism of the earth ' s axis d. rotation of the earth the sun ' s rays fall vertically between tropic of cancer and tropic of capricon. why? explain the geographical importance of march 21, june 21, september 23, and december 22. why is there an eastward increase and westward decrease in time? in the class, exhibit pictures along with short notes depiciting the seasonal changes in nature. record your observations on the changes in nature in

each season and prepare a weather observation diary. with the help of an atlas, find out the standard meridians of different countries and calculate their local time. extended activities 20in search of the source of wind 8 july 1497 vasco da gama started his voyage in four ships from the port of lisbon with a crew of 170. it was the longest voyage ever attempted in search of a country. they reached the coast of brazil and from there they travelled to south east. the winds identified by bartholomeo dias aided gama and took him to the southern coast of africa. however gama left the place

due to disputes with the local government. he sailed past mombassa and reached malindi. on sighting indian merchants there, he sought the help of a local navigator and set sail on 24 april 1498. with the help of the southwest monsoon winds, he reached kappad near kozhikode on 20 may after a voyage of 23 days. but gama struggled a lot when he tried to return during the southwest monsoon season itself neglecting the advice of experts. it took him 132 days to reach malindi! it was the winds and an unyielding will that helped the mariner named vasco da

gama to sail thousands of kilometres from europe to find a sea route to india. the role of winds in that voyage which changed the course of our land ' s history is worthy of mention. how do winds influence us? let ' s look into a few factors like the different types of wind, their formation, and effects. 21 in search of the source of wind you have learnt that atmospheric pressure is the weight of atmospheric air and that the variations in the atmospheric pressure are the basic reason for wind. let ' s look into the variations behind this and their effects. variations in atmospheric pressure

the average weight that air exerts on the earth ' s surface is 1034 mg per cm2. the atmospheric pressure is measured using an instrument called mercury barometer. it is recorded in units like millibar ( mb ) and hectopascal ( hpa ). the level of mercury at normal atmospheric pressure will be 76 cm. the atmospheric pressure at that point will be 1013. 2 mb or 1013. 2 hpa. look at the following diagram. did you notice the places marked a and b in the diagram? which of these places will have a higher atmospheric pressure? why? atmospheric pressure and altitude

the atmospheric pressure decreases with altitude. the pressure decreases at the rate of 1 millibar ( mb ) per an altitude of 10 meters. as one goes up, there is a decrease in atmospheric pressure due to the rarification of air with altitude. why do mountaineers carry oxygen cylinders? fig 2. 1 22in search of the source of wind you might have felt your ears clog as you go to high altitude places like ponmudi, ooty and brahmagiri. this is due to the low pressure in these places. the atmospheric pressure and the altitude are inversely proportional. you would have understood now that altitude is

an important factor influencing the atmospheric pressure. apart from altitude, temperature and humidity also influence the atmospheric pressure. let ' s see how. temperature and atmospheric pressure like any other object, air also expands when it gets heated. the expanded air is less dense and hence it ascends. this leads to the lowering of atmospheric pressure. the ascending air spreads to the sides and it starts cooling. on cooling, it becomes dense and descends. as a result the atmospheric pressure increases. the atmospheric pressure decreases as the temperature increases

and vice versa. haven ' t you understood now that the temperature and the atmospheric pressure are inversely proportional. given below are the day and night scenes of a place ( fig. 2. 2 ). compare the two pictures. identify the situations of low and high atmospheric pressure and suitably mark ' h ' and ' l ' in the pictures. compared to the colder regions, the tropical regions experience low atmospheric pressure. why? fig 2. 2 23 in search of the source of wind humidity and atmospheric pressure humidity refers to the quantity of water present in the

atmosphere. water vapour is lighter than air and hence it ascends. if the quantity of water vapour is more in a unit volume of air, then naturally the atmospheric pressure will be less. humidity and atmospheric pressure are inversely proportional. two places at the same elevation are marked as a and b in the figure ( fig. 2. 3 ). which of these has a low atmospheric pressure? why? hope you have understood that altitude, temperature and humidity experienced in a region influence the atmospheric pressure. variations in atmospheric pressure occur in

accordance with the variations in the above factors. if the atmospheric pressure of an area is higher than that of the surrounding regions, it can be designated as ‘ high pressure ’ ( high - h ). in that case, what would low pressure be? you have learnt about the isotherms in the previous classes. similarly isobars are the imaginary lines joining places having the same atmospheric pressure. we can easily understand the distribution of the atmospheric pressure of any region by observing the isobars. observe fig 2. 4. it shows the distribution of atmospheric pressure of a region in two different

seasons. observe the distribution of isobars in the given figure and mark the places experiencing high pressure and low pressure as h and l respectively. fig 2. 4 a 720 hpa 730 hpa 740 hpa 750 hpa b 750 hpa 740 hpa 730 hpa 720 hpa a b fig 2. 3 arabean sea bay of bengal 24in search of the source of wind subpolar low pressure belt sub tropical high pressure belt sub tropical high pressure belt polar high pressure belt global pressure belts sub polar low pressure belt polar high pressure belt equatorial low pressure belt 60° 30° 0o 30° 60° 90°s 90°n fig 2. 5 horse latitude

superior breeds of horses were once a major export from europe to america and cargo ships were used to carry them across. as the winds are feeble in the subtropical regions, it was dif - ficult for these ships to sail smoothly. in order to make the ship lighter to facilitate easy voyage, they used to throw many of these horses into the sea. thus the zone acquired the name ‘ horse latitude ’. haven ' t you realized that there can be seasonal variation in the atmospheric pressure of the same region? global pressure belts studies have revealed that the atmospheric pressure is more or less the

same between certain latitudes. based on this, the earth ' s surface is divided into different pressure belts. look at fig 2. 5. haven ' t you understood the various pressure belts on the earth? these are known as the global pressure belts. let ' s learn about each of these pressure belts in detail. equatorial low pressure belt this is the zone where the sun ' s rays fall vertically throughout the year. hence the temperature will be high in this zone all through the year. the air expands due to sun ' s heat and rises up on a massive scale. this is the reason for the low pressure

experienced throughout this zone. the equatorial low pressure belt is situated between 5° north and south latitudes. as the air in this zone ascends on a large scale, winds are very feable here. this pressure belt is also known as ' doldrum ', meaning ' the zone with no winds '. the region was a nightmare for the ancient mariners. sub tropical high pressure belt the hot air ascending from the equatorial low pressure belt cools gradually and subsides at the sub tropical zone due to the rotation of the earth. hope you now understand the reason for the occurrence of high

pressure all along this zone. 25 in search of the source of wind find out the position of the sub tropical high pressure belt from the given figure ( fig2. 5 ). pressure belt latitudinal extent sub polar low pressure belt look at fig 2. 5. as this zone is close to the pole, the air is colder here. though the cold air remains close to the earth, the air is thrown away due to the rotation of the earth. as a result, low pressure is experienced all along the sub polar region. find out the location of the sub polar low pressure belt from fig 2. 5.

if the earth did not rotate, would there have been low pressure in the sub polar region? polar high pressure belt this zone experiences severe cold throughout the year. as a result, the air remains chilled under the extreme cold that prevails over the poles, and this contributes to the steady high pressure experienced here. find out the latitudinal location of the polar high pressure belts. complete the following table by incorporating the names of different pressure belts and their latitudinal extent. you are now aware of the distribution of the pressure belts on

the earth. variations in the amount of solar energy received and the rotation of the earth contribute to the formation of different pressure belts. the pressure belts shift according to the apparent movement of the sun. the pressure belts shift northward during the period of sun ' s northward progression 26in search of the source of wind and towards the south during the period of its southward progression. atmospheric pressure and winds global variations in the atmospheric pressure lead to the formation of winds. the horizontal movement of air from a

high pressure zone to a low pressure zone is called wind. there are different types of winds on the earth ' s surface, ranging from light breeze that makes the leaves flutter to cyclones that cause widespread damage. winds are named on the basis of the direction from which they blow. for example the south wind is the wind blowing from the south. the peculiarities of the source regions influence the nature of the wind. winds blowing from the sea will be saturated with moisture whereas the moisture content will be less in winds blowing from drier regions. the speed and direction of wind

the speed and the direction of wind are based on pressure gradient coriolis force friction let ' s examine them one by one. pressure gradient atmospheric pressure is not uniform everywhere on the earth ' s surface. the change in pressure with horizontal distance is termed as pressure gradient. the pressure gradient is said to be steeper when the pressure difference is more. fig 2. 6 depicts the pattern of isobars in two different situations. analyse the figures and answer the following questions : 27 in search of the source of wind northern hemisphere southern hemisphere 60on 30o 0o 30o 60os

fig 2. 7 coriolis force freely moving bodies get deflected to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the southern hemisphere. this is due to the force generated as a result of earth ' s rotation which is known as the coriolis force. this force increases as it moves towards the poles from the equator. admiral ferrel found out that the winds in the northern hemisphere deflect towards their right and those in the southern hemisphere deflect towards their left due to the coriolis effect. the law put forward by him on the basis of this is known as ferrel ' s law. 720 hpa 730 hpa740 hpa

750 hpa 710 hpa 700 hpa 720 hpa 730 hpa 740 hpa 750 hpa 710 hpa 700 hpa a b fig 2. 6 mark the direction of winds in both the diagrams, using arrow marks. in which of these situations will the speed of the wind be higher? why? 28in search of the source of wind to prevent desertification trees are often planted along the borders of deserts. it is a measure to reduce the speed of the wind thereby preventing the expansion of deserts. sub polar low pressure belt sub tropical high pressure belt sub tropical high pressure belt polar high pressure belt fig. 2. 9 global pressure belts and

planetary winds sub polar low pressure belt polar high pressure belt equatorial low pressure belt polar easterlies westerlies north east trade winds south east trade winds westerlies polar easterlies friction look at the given pictures ( fig2. 8 ). in which of these situations do winds blow smoothly? the speed of wind will be high over ocean surfaces and plains as the friction is less. on the other hand, the friction being more along difficult terrains and places with dense forest cover, the speed of wind will be less in those places. pressure belts and winds you have learnt that there exist

differences in pressure over different latitudinal zones at the global level. these pressure differences lead to the formation of winds. winds blow from high pressure regions to low pressure regions. the winds developed between the global pressure belts can be generally called as planetary winds. the different planetary winds are listed below. trade winds westerlies polar easterlies the latitudinal locations of the different pressure belts have been identified from fig 2. 5 and marked in fig 2. 9. haven ' t you noticed the different planetary winds? let ' s study them in detail. fig 2. 8

st andard x 29 in search of the source of wind trade winds the sub tropical high pressure belts in both the hemispheres can be seen in fig 2. 9. from here, the winds blow continuously towards the equatorial low pressure belt. these are known as trade winds. as these winds blow from the northeast in the northern hemisphere, they are known as northeast trade winds. the equatorial low pressure zone where the trade winds from both the hemispheres converge is known as the inter tropical convergence zone ( itcz ). find out the direction and the name of the trade winds in the

southern hemisphere from fig 2. 9. what could be the reason for the trade winds blowing from the southeast and the northeast directions? westerlies haven ' t you seen the sub polar low pressure belts situated between the sub tropical high pressure belts and polar high pressure belts? winds blow continuously from the sub tropical high pressure zones to these low pressure zones. as the direction of these winds is moslty from the west, they are known as the westerlies. identify and note the direction of the westerlies in both the hemispheres from fig 2. 9.

the westerlies are stronger in the southern hemisphere than in the northern hemisphere. this is due to the vast expanse of oceans in the southern hemisphere. you read about the route of vasco da gama at the beginning of this chapter. it was the on the hands of wind … in the past, the trade winds that blowed in a constant direction throughout the year were a blessing to those transporting goods in ships and other vessels. the name ' trade wind ' might have evolved since it helped ocean trade quite a lot. the term ' traden ' in german means ' winds that main - tain constant direction '.

nt - 483 - 3 - soc. sci. - ii - 10 - e - vol. 1 30in search of the source of wind westerlies that helped gama reach the south africa through the south atlantic ocean. the ancient mariners had given different names to the rough westerlies in the southern hemisphere, such as ' roaring forties ' ( along 40° latitudes ), ' furious fifties ' ( along 50° latitudes ) and ' shrieking sixties ' ( 60° latitudes ). polar easterlies you have learnt that the cold polar regions are centres of high pressure. the polar winds are the cold winds that blow from these high pressure areas towards the sub polar low pressure

belts. these winds blow from the east in both the hemispheres due to the coriolis force. hence these are known as polar easterlies. these winds play a significant role in determining the climate of north america, the eastern european countries, and russia. prepare a chart describing the planetary winds, the areas where they blow, and their features and exhibit it in the class. you have learnt that the planetary winds are permanent winds blowing between the global pressure belts throughout the year. there are also winds of seasonal and local occurrence. periodic winds

periodic winds are winds that repeat at regular intervals of time and can be seasonal or diurnal. monsoon winds are example for seasonal winds. what is monsoon? the term ' monsoon ' is derived from the arab word ' mousom '. it means ' winds that change direction in accordance with season '. monsoon is the seasonal reversal of wind in a year. the arab scholar hippalus was the first to observe the shift in the direction of monsoon winds. 31 in search of the source of wind many factors are responsible for the formation of the monsoon wind like the apparent movement of the sun coriolis force

differences in heating sun ' s rays fall vertically to the north of the equator during certain months due to the tilt of the earth ' s axis. this leads to an increase in temperature along the region through which tropic of cancer passes. the pressure belts also shift slightly northwards in accordance with this. the southeast trade winds also cross the equator and moves towards the north as the inter tropical convergence zone ( itcz ) moves northwards during the summer in the northern hemisphere. as the trade winds cross the equator they get deflected and are transformed into southwest monsoon

winds due to the coriolis effect. the low pressure formed over the land due to the intense day temperature attracts these sea winds and further contributes to the formation of the southwest monsoon winds. as a result of the formation of high pressure zones over the asian landmass and low pressure zones over the indian ocean during winter, the northeast trade winds get strengthened. these are the north east monsoon winds. now haven ' t you understood why the phenomenon called monsoon undergoes seasonal reversal of wind in a year? meghasandesam, the epic poem by kalidasa, is a creative

visualization of monsoon winds that change direction according to the season as a messenger. southwest monsoon winds northeast monsoon winds 32in search of the source of wind land and sea breeze you have already learnt that atmospheric pressure is different during day and night at the same place. similarly the reaction of land and sea to sun ' s heat is also not uniform. the land heats up and cools down quickly, whereas the sea gets heated up slowly and can retain the heat for a longer period of time. look at fig. 2. 10. the air in contact with the land also gets

heated up and ascends as the land heats up quickly during the daytime. this leads to the formation of low pressure over the land which causes the comparatively cooler air to blow from the sea. this is known as sea breeze. as the land cools faster than the sea during the night it would be high pressure over the land and low pressure over the sea. this results in the movement of air from the land to sea. this is the land breeze. the land breeze which starts blowing at night becomes active early in the morning and ceases by sunrise. mountain and valley breeze

look at the figure ( fig. 2. 11 ). these are winds experienced in mountainous regions that are well above the sea level. during the day time the air above the mountains gets heated and rises up. as a result, the wind blows upslope from the valley with relatively lower temperature. this is known as valley breeze. sea breeze land breeze valley breeze mountain breeze fig 2. 10 fig 2. 11 33 in search of the source of wind but during night the air in the mountainous regions cools due to the intense cold conditions in that region. as cool air is dense, it

blows towards the valley. this is known as mountain breeze. local winds local winds are winds whose effects are limited to a relatively smaller area. formed as a result of the local pressure differences, these winds are weak. such winds exist in different parts of the world. loo, mangoshowers, and kalbaisakhi are the local winds experienced in india. chinook, harmattan and foehn are some of the local winds in other parts of the world. chinook is a hot local wind that blows down the eastern slope of the rockie mountains in north america. as a result of these winds,

the snow along the eastern slopes of the rockies melts down? the term chinook means ' snow eater ', an apt term that describes its peculiarity. since this wind reduces the severity of the cold, it is helpful for wheat cultivation in the canadian lowlands. foehn is the wind that blows down the northern slopes of the alps mountain. as the air heats up due to pressure from the descent, it helps in reducing the severity of cold in that region. find out from the atlas the countries along the southern slope of the alps. harmattan is a dry wind which blows from the sahara desert

towards west africa. on the arrival of these winds, the humid and sultry conditions of west africa improve significantly. hence, people call these winds as the doctor. loo is another hot wind blowing in the north indian plain. these winds blowing from the rajasthan desert raise the summer temperature of the north indian plains. the winds that blow in south india during this season are called mango showers. these wind cause the ripening and fall of mangoes and hence the name. 34in search of the source of wind variable winds variable winds are winds with entirely different

characteristics formed during certain atmospheric situations. cyclones and anticyclones are variable winds. cyclones cyclones are caused by the formation of low atmospheric pressure at the centre surrounded by high pressure regions. strong whirl winds blow towards such low pressure centres from the surrounding high pressure areas. due to coriolis effect winds flow in the anti - clock wise direction in the northern hemisphere and in the southern hemisphere. based on the climatic region of their formation, cyclones can be classified as tropical

cyclones and temperate cyclone. cyclones often cause extensive damage and destruction wherever they occur. you might have heard of the ockhi - cyloninc winds that struck the coastlines of kerala and lakshdweep during november 2017. this was a tropical cyclone. tropical cylones are caused due to local pressure differences in the tropical oceans, especially the indian ocean. ockhi cyclones left the indian coasts after wreaking havoc on life and property. prepare a report on the distress caused by ockhi and suggest measures to mitigate the impact of such disasters

in future by collecting information from internet and other sources. anti cyclones anti cyclones are phenomenon where strong whirl winds blow from the high pressure centres to the surrounding low pressure areas. due to coriolis effect the pattern of winds in anti cyclones is clock wise in the northern hemisphere and anti clockwise in the southern hemisphere. cyclones anti cyclones clockwise ( southern hemisphere ) clockwise ( northern hemisphere ) anti clockwise ( southern hemisphere ) anti clockwise ( northern hemisphere ) 35 in search of the source of wind

complete the following flow chart showing the classification of winds. the sun ' s aura don ' t you now realize how dynamic the earth ' s atmosphere is? the driving force behind this continuous movement of air is the sun. without its energy there would be no temperature or pressure difference, or any wind. the role of the atmospheric phenomena in keeping the earth ' s surface dynamic is immense. information on the diversities in the nature not only arouses our curiosity but is informative as well. may all of you be able to continue your quest regarding the earth and its diversities. winds

planetary winds.. local winds monsoon.. loo.. variable winds. cylcones temperature, altitude and humidity are inversely proportional to atmospheric pressure. justify. prepare notes on the role of solar energy and the earth ' s rotation in the formation of pressure belts. describe how the coriolis effect causes the deflection of winds on the basis of the direction of the winds mentioned below. a. trade winds b. westerlies let us assess 36human resource development in india observe the pictures. who all can be seen and what jobs are they engaged

in? which are the goods and services made available as a result of these efforts? list in the table the different jobs and the goods and services produced by them. taxi driver arranges transportation farmer produces agricultural crops 37 human resource development in india manpower is an important factor in making available the above mentioned goods and services. therefore, human resource is necessary for the progress of any country. let us examine some aspects of human resource development and its status in india. human resource many goods and services are necessary for improving

human life and for the progress of a country. to facilitate this the manpower of many has to be utilised. human resource refers to people who have the manpower which can be utilised in the production sector. increase in production and progress of a country can be accelerated only if the human resource is developed to the maximum. how can human resource be developed? human resource development is the development of man ' s physical and mental abilities through education, health care, and training. there are different levels of human resource development.

individuals take efforts to develop their own skills. family creates an environment for the development of the potential of individuals. various institutions and agencies provide facilities for education and training. nation provides the necessary facilities for its people to develop their skills. prepare a note on the facilities provided in your area for the development of human resource? features of human resource what features are to be considered while studying human resource? human resource has quantitative as well as qualitative features. examine the chart given below.

38human resource development in india hope the qualitative and quantitative features of population are clear from the given chart. let us analyse the quantitative aspects. size of population size of population refers to the total number of people residing in a country at a particular time. the branch of social science that analyses the population, the changes in its size, its structural aspects, etc is known as demography. every country collects information on the number of people in the country, their age, sex, socio - economic status, etc. and analyses these at

specific intervals of time. this activity is known as population census. in india, census activities are spearheaded by the office of the population registrar general and census commissioner. in india, population census is conducted once in ten years. the last census was conducted in 2011. information related to the population were collected as on 1 march 2011. according to this census there are 121. 02 crore people in india. out of this, 58. 65 crore are females and 62. 37 crore are males. why are population studies conducted? population studies help the government to quantitatively assess the

different needs of the people and to plan activities and programmes accordingly. what other help do they offer? human resource quantitative features qualitative features size of population population density growth of population population structure age structure sex ratio labour force participation rate dependency ratio education health care literacy rate life expectancy birth rate death rate 39 human resource development in india informs the availability of human resource in a country. depicts the extent of basic facilities required by the people.

quantfies the goods and services required. determines the socio - economic development policies. find out from your elders what information was collected from your home for the 2011 census. collect more information on the population by visiting the website www. censusindia. gov. in according to the united nations organisation report 2014, the world population is 724. 4 crores. one in six person of the world population is an indian. 17. 5 percentage of the world population is in india. china ranks first in position with 19. 4 percent and india ranks second. in terms of land

area, india ranks seventh with only 2. 4 percent. india and china can play a major role in making human resource available. it has been proved by the experience of countries like the usa, japan, and china that a nation can attain high economic development through better human resource development. density of population inhabitation is not the same everywhere in india. we have already understood the factors that influence population. density of population refers to the number of people per square kilometer area. this differs in various states in india. july 11 world population day

undp has declared 11 july as the world population day since 1989 and is observed. this day was selected because the world population reached 500 crore on july 11, 1987. population growth rate in india population growth refers to the increase in the number of people in an area within a specific period of time. it is how does the population density of an area influence the availability of human resources? discuss. 40human resource development in india indicated in terms of percentage and states the increase in a year as compared to the previous year. examine the table

indicating population growth rate in india. y ear population ( in crores ) decadal growth rate ( in percentage ) 1951 36. 11 13. 31 ( 1941 - 51 ) 1961 43. 90 21. 64 ( 1951 - 61 ) 1971 54. 82 24. 80 ( 1961 - 71 ) 1981 68. 33 24. 66 ( 1971 - 81 ) 1991 84. 64 23. 87 ( 1981 - 91 ) 2001 102. 87 21. 54 ( 1991 - 2001 ) 2011 121. 02 17. 64 ( 2001 - 11 ) birth rate increases death rate decreases birth rate decreases death rate increases birth rate and death rate are equal migration population increases population declines no change in population population increases in one region but decreases in another region migration

migration is the settlement of people of a region in another region. birth rate birth rate is the number of live births per 1000. death rate death rate is the number of deaths per 1000. source : census of india 2011 ( provisional ) which decade has marked the maximum population growth? from which year onwards is there a decrease in the population growth rate? how much decrease did the population growth rate record in the decade 2001 - 2011? it can be seen that india ' s population growth rate has been declining since 1971. the birth rate, death rate, and migration are the factors that

affect the population of a country. observe the chart given below. 41 human resource development in india population structure age structure is the classification of population into different age groups and presenting the ratio of each group in the population. for example, classification is done in age groups like 0 - 14 years, 15 - 59 years, and 60 and above years. population : age structure distribution source : census of india 2011 what percentage of the total population belongs to the age group of 0 - 14 years? what percentage of the total population belongs to the age

group of 60 years and above? what percentage of the total population belongs to the age group of 15 - 59 years? what changes are made in the population of a country by birth rate, death rate, and migration? prepare a note. given below is the age structure based on census of india 2011. labour force participation rate is the ratio of the population in the age group 15 - 59, who are either employed or actively looking for jobs. this age group has the capability to contribute to the progress of the nation. the age groups 0 - 14 years and 60 years and above are included in the

dependent group. their proportion in total population is known as dependency ratio. this group depends on the working force of the country. an increase in the dependency ratio decreases the per capita income. 42human resource development in india many people in the age group 15 - 59 years do not have a job. this points to the necessity of utilising the human resource aptly. discuss the problems in the economy as a result of a decrease in the labour force participation rate and increase in the dependency ratio? the sex ratio plays an important role in determining the

human resource of a country. according to census 2011, the sex ratio in india is 940. sex ratio is the number of females per 1000 males. conduct a discussion in class on the topic sex ratio and the nation ' s economic development. so far we have discussed the quantitative aspects of the population. there are certain aspects that improve the quality of human resource. let us look at them. qualitative aspects of human resource the population that can contribute to the manpower of the nation is its strength. what are the qualitative factors that improve the labour potential? education

healthcare training social capital let us see the advantages in developing human resource. observe the diagram. improved human resource productivity of the workers increases entrepreneurship improves makes possible the development and use of advanced technology social welfare is ensured natural resource is utilized effectively economic inequality is reduced 43 human resource development in india prepare a note on how human resource development helps in economic development. lets observe how each qualitative factor improves human resource. education and human resource development

a mere increase in the population will not lead to the development of a country ; it requires people with potential and skills. education has a major role in moulding skilled people. let ' s see how education helps in the development of a country. observe the flowchart. experts argue that at least 6 % of the national income must be spent for providing facilities in the education sector. during the year 2017 - 18 government of india spent only 3. 7 % of the gross domestic product ( gdp ) on education. hence the literacy rate could not be improved along

the expected lines. observe the table given below. ministry of human resource development in india, a department operates for human resource development. the government of india started this department in the year 1985. the main responsibility of this department is to plan and implement the activities necessary for human resource development. source : census of india 2011 india : literacy rate female 65. 46 male 82. 14 total 74. 04 improves the standard of living education betters the technological know - how improves the skills of individuals helps to secure better job and income

44human resource development in india literacy rate refers to the percentage of population that can read and write with comprehension. let us see the projects implemented in india to develop education and skills. apart from these, several programmes are also initiated by state governments. prepare a report by collecting details about the different educational development programmes undertaken by the state and local government institutions in kerala. projects goals integrated child development scheme ( icds ) to ensure integrated development of children upto 6 years

to provide healthcare for pregnant and lactating women to improve the working skills of the youth to ensure the availability of people with employable skills samagra shiksha was formed by integrating sarva shiksha abihyan ( ssa ) and rashtriya madhyamik shiksha abhiyan ( rmsa ) to the teacher training institutes like scert / diet national skill development and monetary reward scheme rashtriya uchthal shiksha abhiyan ( rusa ) to increase the access to higher education to improve the quality of higher education samagra shiksha abhiyan ( ssa )

to ensure universal education to all up to higher secondary level to ensure quality and equity to promote the vocational education strenthen 45 human resource development in india there are institutions at various levels to provide education in a country. schools, colleges, universities, technical education institutions, etc are among them. our country has made education a fundamental right and has passed the right to education act ( rte act ) in 2009. the constitution ensures the goal of " elementary education for all " through rte. however, problems still exist in the

education sector of india which need to be solved. certain sections drop out from schools without completing primary education. there is a lack of availability of basic facilities in the education sector. quality of education has to be improved. conduct a discussion on the topic ' educational facilities in india and the existing problems '. human resource development and healthcare what is health? according to the world health organisation ( who ), health is a state of physical, mental and social wellbeing. along with physical conditions, importance is

given to mental and social conditions as well. it is the government ' s responsibility to ensure healthcare for all. only then can each individual work for the economic development of a country. let us see how healthy persons can participate in the progress of a country. production increases with the increase in efficiency and the number of working days. natural resources can be utilised properly. medical expense can be reduced, thereby reducing the government ' s expenditure. national skill development corporation ( nsdc ) in order to compensate the shortage of

skilled people, the nsdc has been giving skill training in various fields such as construction, tourism, banking, and engineering. 46human resource development in india economic development is possible through increase in production let ' s list the facilities to be ensured for healthcare. availability of nutritious food availability of clean water preventive measures cleanliness medical facilities ensuring of leisure and entertainment healthy environment various institutions operate to ensure the availability of the above - mentioned facilities. the government has set up

institutions that work at different levels in the medical sector. medical colleges district hospitals community health centres primary health centres health sub centres all india institute of medical sciences aiims has been es - tablished to make available the services of the best doctors and modern medical facilities. now there are 9 such institutions working in different parts of the country. discuss how the different institutions working in the health sector help in making available the medical attention and preventive measures to the people.

there are various hospitals in the cooperative and private sectors. many multispecialty hospitals operate to make available modern treatment facilities. there are several institutions which provide different systems of medicine like ayurveda, yoga, naturopathy, unani, sidha and homeopathy ; national rural health mission ( nrhm ) and national urban health mission ( nuhm ) function to make available quality 47 human resource development in india health services to all. the national rural health mission operates in the rural sector. the national urban health

mission provides improved health services to the residents of urban slums and other marginalised people in towns with a population of more than 50, 000. as a result of these programmes and activities, the life expectency in india has been improved. observe the table below. source : census of india 2011 india : life expectancy female 67. 7 male 64. 6 total 66. 1 life expectancy is the expected average years of life of a person lives. organise a seminar on the topic ' the role of education and healthcare in human resource development '. various resources are to be used properly for the economic

development of a country. we have understood that human resource is as important as natural resources. when the natural resources are combined with human efforts there is an increase in production leading to economic development. therefore, planned efforts are required in the education and health sectors to develp human resource. only then can resources then can the quality and development of human resource be attained. do you agree with the statement that the main reason for prosperity and poverty in the world is the difference in human resource development? prepare a note. let us assess

list out the quantitative and qualitative aspects of human resource? prepare a note by analysing the importance of population studies. 48human resource development in india compare the changes in population due to birth rate, death rate and migration. labour force participation rate and dependency rate as per the census of india 2011 is given below. prepare a graph based on this. list the advantages of the increase in labour force participation rate and disadvantages due to increase in dependency rate. what are the factors that improve human resource?

how does this influence a country ' s development? how does education help in a country ' s development? prepare a flowchart. list the existing problems in the health sector. explain how education and healthcare help in human resource development. extended activities visit the website of the census india and collect the latest population data. organize various programmes in connection with the world population day. find out the dependency rate and the labour force participation rate by collecting the age structure from the families of your classmates.

prepare a report by interviewing the headmaster on the programmes which are undertaken by the school to improve the quality of education. labour force partici - dependency rate pation rate ( in percentage ) ( in percentage ) female 62. 8 37. 2 male 62. 2 37. 7 the british realized that they could ascertain power and collect the taxes in their colonies only if they clearly understood the special geographical features of each of them. this made them decide to conduct various surveys and prepare maps on their basis. accordingly three surveys namely

the tax survey, the topographic survey, and the trigonometric survey were carried out by the east india company in the indian subcontinent. these surveys that were began with the stewardship of col. william lambton in 1802 which took more than 50 years to be completed, were very accurate. several indians were part of these surveys conducted through difficult terrains and hostile climate, carrying the heavy metallic survey instrument called theodolite which weighed half a ton. the surveys incurred immense expenditure and took a toll on many. col. george everest joined as an

assistant to lambton in 1818. this was the first survey that recorded the correct measurements of the himalayan mountain ranges. as a tribute to george everest who took up the survey as lambton ' s successor the highest peak in the himalayan mountain ranges was named as mount everest. the first topographic maps of the indian subcontinent were prepared after the completion of the survey in 1854. col. william lambton george everest 50landscape analysis through maps haven ' t you read the above description? finding the precise location of the earth ' s surface features is essential for the

preparation of maps. each part of the earth is measured with the help of survey instruments and maps are prepared based on these measurements. what are the features of the topographic maps? how do these differ from other maps? let ' s look into these aspects. topographic map you have learnt that large scale maps are prepared by incorporating minute details of relatively smaller areas. topographic maps depict in minute detail all the natural and manmade features on the earth ' s surface. these maps contain the important surface features such as the undulations of the

terrain, rivers, other water bodies, forests, agricultural land, barren land, villages, towns, and transport and telecommunication systems. in india, the preparation of topographic maps is entrusted to a central government agency named survey of india. certain restrictions have been imposed on the use of topographic maps of strategic regions owing to the national security concerns. uses of topographic maps topographic maps are used for various purposes ; let ' s see what they are : analysis of the physical and the cultural features of the earth surface.

for military operations and the preparation of military maps. identification and studying of the natural and the cultural resources of a region as part of economic planning. for urban planning. topographic maps can be read only through proper training and practical experience. a thorough knowledge of the numbering scheme, locational aspects, the conventional signs and symbols, the elevation and slope of the terrain, and the methods of their representation are very essential for comprehending topographic maps. toposheets the english term ‘ topography ’ is derived from the greek terms

‘ topo ’ and ‘ graphie ’ which mean ‘ place ’ and ‘ to write or draw ’ respectively. topographic maps are also known as toposheets. landscape analysis through maps 51 the following map is part of a toposheet ( fig 4. 1 ). find out how it differs from the maps you are familiar with. fig 4. 1 52landscape analysis through maps look at the number ( d4510 ) noted above the given toposheet fig 4. 1. what does this indicate? do all the toposheets contain such numbers? survey of india the official agency responsible for the preparation of topographic maps in our country is the survey of india with its

headquarters at dehradun. in india, the topographic maps are prepared in scales 1 : 1000000, 1 : 250000, 1 : 50000 and 1 : 25000 for various purposes. survey of india made topo - graphical maps for all the places in india. the topographic maps prepared in india are generally known as the ' sur - vey of india maps ' ( soi maps ). layout and numbering of toposheets the number of the toposheet denotes the area it represents. for example, the number of the given toposheet is 45d / 10. this number denotes certain parts of gujarat and rajasthan. similarly

unique numbers are given to toposheets covering different regions. let ' s see how these numbers are obtained. toposheets for the whole world have been prepared in several sheets of same size and shape. the whole world is picturised in 2222 sheets as follows. there are 1800 sheets for regions between 60° north and south latitudes, 420 sheets for regions between 60° and 88° latitudes in both hemispheres and 2 sheets for both the poles. analyse the given description and figures ( figs. 4. 2, 4. 3, 4. 4, 4. 5, 4. 6 ) and understand the numbering and order of the toposheets representing india.

the numbering of india ' s toposheets are done on the basis of the india and adjoining countries map series. as each of the maps in this series is in 1 : 1000000 scale, these are known as million sheets. landscape analysis through maps 53 fig. 4. 2 54landscape analysis through maps the million sheets covering 4° latitudinal and 4° longitudinal extent are given numbers from 1 to 105. these numbers are known as index numbers. look at fig. 4. 3. each of the sheets in this category is divided into 16 parts known as degree sheets. each million sheet is divided into 16 parts in the order

a, b, c, d, … … …. upto p as in fig. 4. 4. for example, the million sheet numbered 55 is divided into 16 parts as 55a, 55b, 55c, … etc. each of these sheets with 1° latitudinal and longitudinal extent is prepared in 1 : 250000 scale. the degree sheets are further divided into 16 equal parts. each degree sheet has 15 ' ( 15 minutes ) latitudinal and longitudinal extent ( fig. 4. 5 ) and are numbered as 1, 2, 3, …. 16, for example, 55, 55 2 d, 55 3 d, … up to 55 16 d. these sheets are prepared in 1 : 50000 scale ( fig 4. 6 ). 55 3 d fig. 4. 6 fig. 4. 5 fig. 4. 4 fig. 4. 3 million sheets degree sheets 55

55d 55 can you explain how the toposheet in the fig. 4. 1 got the number d4510? answer the following by analyzing fig. 4. 2. the parts of states that are included in toposheet number 45. the index numbers of toposheets which cover the state of odisha. landscape analysis through maps 55 the states that are included in toposheet number 73. the index numbers of toposheets which cover the state of karnataka. the index numbers of toposheets which cover kerala. now you might have understood the layout and numbering of toposheets. let ' s take a look at how the surface features of the

earth are represented in these maps. conventional signs and symbols you have learnt in previous classes that various features on the earth ' s surface are represented in topographic maps using different colours and symbols. as the colours and symbols used in the toposheets are internationally accepted, the maps prepared in one country can be easily understood and analysed by the people of another. look at table 4. 1. it contains the conventional signs and symbols used in toposheets. road metalled road unmetalled road footpath cart track bridge with road railway railway - broad gauge

railway with station railway - meter gauge level crossing railway with bridge boundary international boundary state boundary district boundary taluk boundary waterbodies stream river tidal river spring well tube well [UNK] [UNK] [UNK] rs signs and geographic features signs and geographic featuressymbols symbols table 4. 1 56landscape analysis through maps vegetation grass palms coniferous trees bamboo dense forest reserve forest table 4. 1. conventional signs and symbols settlements permanent house temporary house clustered settlements dispersed settlements linear settlements

monuments and buildings fort temple church mosque tomb grave lighthouse dispensary health centre airport po post office to telegraph office pto post and telegraph office ps police station ib inspection bunglow rh rest house elevation contour lines form line 240 spot height 200 triangulated height bm215 benchmark signs and geographic features signs and geographic featuressymbols symbols table 4. 1. ( cont ' d ) landscape analysis through maps 57 find out the conventional colours used to represent different geographic features and complete table 4. 2. feature colour

latitudes and longitudes non perennial waterbodies railway lines, telephone and telegraph lines boundary lines oceans, rivers, wells, tube wells … … ( perennial waterbodies ) forests grasslands trees and shrubs orchards cultivable land barren land settlements, roads, paths grid lines ( eastings, northings and their numbers ) contour lines and their values sand dunes and sand hills table 4. 2 conventional colours representing elevation elevation or height is represented in toposheets using contour lines, form lines, spot height,

triangulated height, and benchmarks. contour lines contour lines are imaginary lines joining places having the same elevation above the sea level. form lines when it is difficult to measure the elevation of places through land surveys due to rugged terrain, the elevation is represented with the help of broken lines. these are form lines. spot height spot height represents the actual height of a place by recording the height in digits beside a black dot. sometimes the height alone is recorded without the black dot. triangulated height

height of places estimated through trigonometric surveys are recorded in maps using ' ' symbol. benchmark the height of reservoirs and prominent buildings are recorded along with the letters bm. 58landscape analysis through maps 15 16 17 18 15 16 17 18 fig 4. 7 grid reference you know that places are located on maps and globe with the help of latitudes and longitudes. but it is difficult to show the precise location of minor geographical features in toposheets, which are large scale maps. to solve this difficulty north - south and east - west lines in red are

incorporated in the toposheets. the north - south lines are called eastings and the east - west lines are called northings. the values of the lines would also be recorded appropriately. these are north - south lines their value increases towards the east. the value of the eastings immediately left to the geographic features is considered for identifying a location. look at the given toposheet ( fig 4. 1 ). find out the symbols and colours you have familiarized. you are now familiar with the conventional signs and symbols in toposheets. let us see how the location of places is identified in

these maps. haven ' t you noticed the red lines drawn lengthwise and breadthwise in the given toposheet ( fig 4. 1 )? what are they? what are their uses? find out the eastings and northings in the given toposheet ( fig 4. 1 ) analyse the figures ( figs 4. 7, 4. 8 ) and their descriptions to understand the salient features of eastings and northings. eastings landscape analysis through maps 59 northings 78 77 76 75 78 77 76 75 fig 4. 8 81 82 83 84 85 86 fig 4. 9 38 37 36 35 3481 82 83 84 85 86 38 37 36 35 34 the grids formed jointly by the eastings and the northings are called reference grids. in 1 : 50000

toposheets each grid with 2 cm width & 2 cm breadth covers an area with 1 kilometre length & 1 kilometre breadth on the earth ' s suface. let ' s see how features can be located in toposheets using these grids. look at the model grid ( fig 4. 9 ) given below. don ' t you see the symbols of some geographic features in the grid? it is their location we need to find. the sizes of the geographic features included in the model grid are not one and the same. since they differ in size, the location of these features can be found out in these are lines drawn in the east - west direction.

their value increases towards the north. the value of the northings immediately to the south of the feature in the map is considered for identifying a location. find the values of the eastings and the northings from the given toposheet ( fig 4. 1 ). 60landscape analysis through maps two different ways, namely, 4 - figure grid reference and 6 - figure grid reference. 4 - figure grid reference look at the grid with a lake in fig. 4. 10. let ' s examine how the lake can be located. in the 4 - figure grid reference method, the value of the easting to the immediate left of the feature

( lake ) is to be written ( here it is 52 ). then the value of the northing just south of the feature ( 18 ) is to be written. thus the location of the lake, as per the 4 - figure grid reference, will be 5218 ( fifty two eighteen ). 51 52 53 19 51 52 53 20 18 19 20 18 14 15 16 76 14 15 16 77 75 76 77 75 15 16 76 77 76 77 15 16 fig 4. 10 fig. 4. 12 fig. 4. 11 locate the geographic features of fort, graveyard, and settlements shown in the model grid ( fig 4. 9 ), using the 4 - figure grid reference method. 6 - figure grid reference relatively smaller geographic features are generally located

through the 6 - figure grid reference method. look at the given grids ( fig 4. 11 ) depicting a tube well. let ' s examine how the tube well can be located. while determining the location of the tube well, the value of the easting to the left of it ( 15 ) is to be written first. then divide the area up to the next easting into 10 equal parts as shown in figure ( fig 4. 12 ). find the exact division on which the tube well is located ( 5 ) and write it next to the value of easting already found. ( 155 ). landscape analysis through maps 61 map terrain and contour lines fig. 4. 13 100m 200m 200m 300m

400m500m 600m 300m 400m 500m 100m 200m 300m 400m500m600m 200m 300m400m 500m now write the value of the northing just below the tube well ( 76 ) along with the easting ' s value ( 15576 ). divide the area up to the next northing as being divided into 10 equal parts as shown in fig. 4. 12 and find the exact division on which the tube well is located ( 6 ) and write it with the values already written ( 155766 - fifteen five seventy six six ). what is obtained ( 155766 ) is the exact 6 grid reference of the given tube well. locate the smaller geographic features such as temple, church, well,

light house and bridge shown in the model grid ( fig 4. 9 ), using the 6 - figure grid reference method. now you have understood how to determine the location of features in topographic maps. let ' s see how the shape of the terrain is assessed. look at the smooth curved brown lines shown in the topographic map ( fig. 4. 1 ). by what name are these lines known? what is their use? contour lines observe the pictures given ( figs. 4. 13 and 4. 14 ). these are the pictures of contour lines and the shapes of the landforms they represent. contours are imaginary lines drawn on maps

connecting those places having equal elevation from the sea level. a contour line joins points of equal elevation above a given level such as mean sea level. the respective altitude will be marked with each contour line. these are called contour values. with the help of contour values we can find out the altitude of the places shown in maps. two different landforms and their contour representations are given in figs. 4. 13 and 4. 14. which are the landforms you can identify in these pictures? 62landscape analysis through maps contour interval the contour interval of toposheets

in the 1 : 50000 scale is generally 20 metres. by analysing the values of the contours, the altitude of places represented in the maps can be found out. to understand the relief of el - evated landforms, contours with 100 metre interval are used. map terrain and contour lines fig. 4. 14 100m100m 200m 300m 400m500m 600m 700m 800m 900m 200m300m400m500m 600m 700m 800m don ' t you see that the value difference between contours will always be equal? this difference between the value of two adjacent contours is called contour interval. for example, the

contour interval in figs. 4. 13 and 4. 14 is 100 metres. you might have noticed that in the given picture ( fig 4. 14 ) the contours are closely spaced at certain places and are farther apart elsewhere. the closely spaced contours represent steep slopes and the widely spaced contours represent gentle slopes. the following three things can be assessed from the contour lines in topographic maps. altitude of the place nature of the slope shape of the landform let ' s see how the shapes of landforms are determined using contour lines. this can be done using two methods.

find the contour interval in the toposheet provided ( fig. 4. 1 ). landscape analysis through maps 63 figure 4. 15 a b assessing the topography method 1 directly from the contours fig. 4. 17 500m 600m 700m 800m 900m 1000m 500m 600m 700m 800m 900m 1000m ab as shown in fig. 4. 15, place a paper strip, across the contour pattern of which the topography is to be assessed. mark a and b at either ends of the paper strip. mark and label the values of the contour lines cutting across the paper strip. transfer these contour values on to the x - axis of a graph paper ( fig. 4. 16 ).

choose a convenient scale and mark the contour values on the y - axis. draw vertical lines from the points of contour values on the x - axis ( fig. 4. 17 ). intersect these vertical lines against the corresponding values in y axis and mark the intersecting points. join these points by smooth curves. find out the contour lines of the elevated regions in fig. 4. 1. mark their contour values on a piece of paper and identify the shape of the landform. fig. 4. 16 500m 600m 700m 800m 900m 1000m 500m 600m 700m 800m 900m 1000m ab shade the area using a pencil. thus we get the shape of the

landform represented by the contour lines. 64landscape analysis through maps fig 4. 18 method 2 by tracing out the contour lines copy the contour lines on a tracing paper and transfer them onto another paper. draw a line ab through the centre of the contours as shown in fig. 4. 18. fig 4. 19 100m 200m 300m 400m 500m 600m 100m 200m 300m 400m 500m 600m ab draw the x and y axes below the line ab as shown in fig. 4. 19. mark the values of the contours on both the y - axis in an appropriate scale ( 0. 5cm = 100m or 1cm = 100m ). join equal values on both the y - axes using narrow lines.

draw vertical lines from the points where contours cut across ab. mark the points at which these vertical lines intersect the horizontal lines ( as in fig. 4. 19 ). join the points with smooth curves and shade the area using a pencil. thus we get the shape of the landform represented by the contours. landscape analysis through maps 65 using the methods mentioned above, plot the topography represented by the following contour patterns ( fig. 4. 20 and fig. 4. 21 ). fig. 4. 20 fig. 4. 21 now you might have understood the methods of plotting the

topography from contour lines. let ' s examine how the visibility between two places is determined. intervisibility as part of topographical map interpretation, there arises a need to find out whether two places are intervisible. this can be solved only by finding out the relief as well as the slope of the region. if any two places are mutually visible, then we can establish that these places are intervisible. intervisibility assessment is being applied for erecting electric posts, mobile towers and wireless transmission towers. look at fig. 4. 22. you can see the points

marked as p, q, r, and s between the contours. can you identify the points which are intervisible? for assessing the intervisibility, the shape of the terrain must be inferred from the contour lines. the given picture ( fig 4. 23 ) represents the shape of the landform inferred from the contour lines. by analysing this picture, we can assess the intervisibility between places. fig. 4. 22 fig. 4. 23 100m 200m 300m 400m 500m 600m 100m 200m 300m 400m 500m 600m ab 700m 800m 700m 800m not intervisible not intervisible notintervisible intervisible p q r s 66landscape analysis through maps

determine the shape of the terrain represented by the given contours ( fig. 4. 24 ) and complete table 4. 3 by checking the intervisibility between the places m, n, o and p. places intervisible / not intervisible between m and n between n and o between o and p between m and o between m and p between n and p table 4. 3 figure 4. 24 let ' s examine how the toposheets can be interpreted based on the basic knowledge you ' ve acquired so far. toposheet interpretation you might have noticed that some basic information regarding

the sheet as well as the physical and cultural features pertaining to the area represented are given in the toposheet ( fig. 4. 1 ). the study and interpretation of such maps can be done in different stages as mentioned below. 1. marginal information / primary information 2. physical / natural features 3. cultural / man - made features landscape analysis through maps 67 marginal information the general information given outside the margins in topographic maps is known as marginal / primary information. the toposheet number, name of the area, latitudes and

longitudes, values of northings and eastings, scale of the map, contour interval, years of survey and publication and the agency in charge of the survey are the marginal information in the toposheet. primary information indicators toposheet number - ( a ) name of the place represented - ( b ) latitudinal location - ( c ) 1, ( c ) 2 longitudinal location - ( d ) 1, ( d ) 2 easting - ( e ) 1, ( e ) 2 northing - ( f ) 1, ( f ) 2 scale of the map - ( g ) contour interval - ( h ) year of survey - ( i ) year of publication - ( j ) agency in charge of survey - ( k )

indicators regarding the marginal information of toposheets and a toposheet labelled with such information are given ( fig 4. 25 ). find out the marginal information from the map on the basis of the given indicators. prepare a note on this. list the primary information of the given topographic map d4510 in fig. 4. 1 as was done in the case of the toposheet d5611. 68landscape analysis through maps fig. 4. 25 landscape analysis through maps 69 physical features water bodies such as rivers, streams, springs, etc. as well as the different landforms are the physical features in topographic

maps. their locations are to be found by direction or the grid reference method. find answers to the following questions by reading the given toposheets ( fig 4. 25 ). which is the major river flowing through this area? in which direction does it flow? on which bank of the river are the forests seen? what is the name of the reserve forest in this area? how many springs are seen in this region? locate them based on direction. locate the open scrubs in this area find out the location of the following using the 6 - figure grid reference method.

476a 447 the spring north of parampur village cultural features settlements, different types of roads, boundaries, places of worship, agricultural lands, post office, police station, bridges, wells and tube wells are a few cultural features shown in toposheets. their location can also be found based on direction or the grid reference method. find answers to the following questions by reading the given toposheets ( fig 4. 25 ). identify the districts in karnataka to which the area belongs. based on which natural feature is the district boundary determined?

where is the metalled road seen? 70landscape analysis through maps 34 35 54 34 35 55 54 55 ps rs 22 23 77 22 23 78 77 78 in which direction is the gadalamari village situated? which are the villages where post offices can be found? find the location using the 4 - figure grid reference method. aldobhavi village ganavathala village fort to the north - eastern corner using the 6 - figure grid reference method, find the locations of : temple near gadalamari village temple within the lingusugar reserve forest post office in ganavathala village

interpret the toposheet no. given in fig. 4. 1 and prepare a report based on its physical and cultural features. let us assess find out the location of settlements and graveyard in the given grid, using the 4 - figure grid reference method. find out the location of spring, mosque, railway station, police station, and well in the given grid, using the 6 - figure grid reference method. landscape analysis through maps 71 match the contour in column a with the shape of landforms in column b. contour shape of landform ab collect different toposheets and interpret the marginal

information as well as the physical and cultural features, and prepare short notes. extended activity 72public expenditure and public revenue observe the pictures given above. they are related to certain activities performed by the government. what are they? find out other activities of the government. distribution of drinking water distribution of welfare pension protection of environment 73 public expenditure and public revenue we have seen that the government undertakes many activities. why are these activities carried out? they are for the welfare of

the people. money is required for all these activities. the expenditure incurred by the government is known as public expenditure. expenditure increases with an increase in the activities of the government. given below is the graph showing the public expenditure of india from 2010 - 11 to 2016 - 17. observe the graph and find out the annual increase in the public expenditure. public expenditure can be classified into developmental expenditure and non - developmental expenditure. the expenditure incurred by the government for constructing roads,

bridges and harbours, starting up new enterprises, setting up educational institutions, etc. are considered as developmental expenditure. expenditure incurred for war, interest, pension, etc. are considered as non - developmental expenditure. find out the government expenditure in your ward and classify them into developmental and non - developmental expenditure. amount ( rupees in crores ) year source : central budget 2016 - 17 ( www. indiabudget. gov. in ) public expenditure in india from 2010 - 11 to 2016 - 17 74public expenditure and public revenue

hope you have understood from the graph that there has been a steady and continuous increase in india ' s public expenditure. why does india ' s public expenditure increase? let ' s see how an increase in population increases the government expenditure. as population increases, facilities for education, health, shelter, etc. have to be provided for more people. for this, the government has to spend more money. some other important reasons are listed below. increase in the defence expenditure welfare activities urbanisation discuss how these factors lead to an increase in public expenditure

and make inferences. government need income to meet expenditure. let ' s see what are the sources of revenue to the government. public revenue the income of the government is known as public revenue. think about the sources of revenue to the government. government earns income primarily from two sources. they are given in the chart below. public revenue tax revenue non tax revenue direct tax tax indirect tax taxes taxes are the main source of income to the government. tax is a compulsory payment to the government made by the public for

meeting expenditure towards welfare activities, developmental activities etc. the person who pays tax is called tax payer. taxes are of two types. 75 public expenditure and public revenue direct tax can you identify the receipt given? where do we remit land tax? land tax is paid by the person on whom it is imposed. here the burden of the tax is borne by the same person on whom tax is imposed. these types of taxes are called direct taxes. the unique feature of direct tax is that the tax payer undertakes the burden of the tax. major direct taxes in india personal income tax

it is the tax imposed on the income of individuals. the rate of tax increases as the income increases. income tax is applicable to the income that is above a certain limit. in india the income tax is collected by the central government as per the income tax act 1961. corporate tax this is the tax imposed on the net income or profit of the companies. indirect tax an important feature of indirect tax is that the tax burden can be shifted from the person on whom it is imposed to another person. for example in the case of sale tax the tax burden initially falls

on the trader. but the trader transfers the burden of the tax along with its price to the consumer. the tax is included in the price paid by the consumer. with a view to simplify the indirect tax system and to introduce one tax across the country goods and services tax ( gst ) was introduced by incorporating majority of existing indirect taxes. the prevailing system will continue for those items that are not included in gst. 76public expenditure and public revenue goods and services tax ( gst ) goods and services tax ( gst ) was introduced in india on 1st july 2017

merging different indirect taxes imposed by central and state governments. taxes are levied at different stages starting from production to final consumption of goods and services. in each stage the tax is imposed on the value added. hence tax is collected only on value addition. the tax paid in the earlier stages need not be paid by the final consumer. gst registration is mandatory to the traders if the turnover is more than 20 lakh in a financial year. goods and services taxes ( gst ) : types the central and state government impose gst on goods and

services traded within the state. the tax imposed by the central government is known as central gst ( cgst ) and the tax imposed by the state government is known as state gst ( sgst ). these taxes are collected jointly from the consumers and are shared equally by the centre and state governments. should the tax be imposed on the goods and services traded from one states to the other? the gst on interstate trade is imposed and collected by the central government. this is known as integrated gst ( igst ). the share of the state government on igst is given by the central government. gst rates

no gst is imposed on essential services and daily consumption goods including unprocessed food items. gst is arranged under four slabs as 5 %, 12 %, 18 % and 28 %. the major taxes merged into gst central excise duty service taxes central sale tax state value added tax luxury tax advertisement tax octroi entertainment tax 77 public expenditure and public revenue let us examine a bill received from a shop and find out the following. the gst registration number. gst rates as represented by symbols given in coloumn 1. are central and state gst rates same?

items that are exempted from gst. whether higher gst rates are applicable to necessary or luxury goods? gst council union finance minister is the chairman of gst council and the members are union minister of state in charge of finance and state finance ministers. the council makes recommendation on the following. taxes, cess and surcharges that are to be merged into gst. the goods and services that are to be brought under gst. item name mrp qty rate total $ complan keser b 305 1 299. 32 299. 32 @ santhigiri turm 72 1 65 65 @ brah fried rawa 89 1 86. 08 86. 08 garlic 60 0. 2 55. 64 11. 13

@ cycle 3 in 1 50 2 49 98 @ spyzee roasted 70 1 66. 2 66. 2 $ cadburys d / m 20 2 19 38 $ colgate strong 176 1 171. 12 171. 12 @ brah wheat powd 53 1 51. 25 51. 25 @ pavithram ginge 218 1 206. 28 206. 28 $ vim liquid ymi 155 1 152. 88 152. 88 $ harpic 500 ml 80 1 78. 05 78. 05 $ surf excel dete 190 1 186. 49 186. 49 $ surf matic f / l 225 1 222. 98 222. 98 $ harpic bath cle 40 1 38. 3 38. 3! doppi ssk delux 42 5 35 175 $ ujala cri & shine 110 1 107. 23 107. 23 $ x all lotion 47 1 44 44 uzhunnu ball 97 1 83 83 round off - 0. 31 total 2180 net amt : cgst % cg amt sgst % sgamt! 269. 13 0 0 @ 545. 53 2. 5 13. 64 2. 5 13. 64

# 0 6 0 6 0 $ 1134. 21 9 102. 08 9 102. 08 & 0 1 4 0 1 4 0 total : 115. 72 115. 72 date : 08 / 09 / 2018 billno : 50704 pan. aaifm9805b gst32aaifm9805bizk gst rule 2017 - tax invoice cash gst %! = 0 %, @ = 5 %, # = 12 %, $ = 18 %, & = 28 % total item : 19 items that do not come under gst at present petroleum products ( raw petroleum, diesel, petrol, natural gas, aviation fuel ) electricity, liquor do not come under gst. the existing indirect tax system will continue on these items. determining gst rates. the time frame for including the excluded items into gst. determining the tax exemption

limit on the basis of total turnover. discuss whether direct or indirect tax seriously affect common people. hints : tax burden, price rise, income inequality the other two sources of income to the government are surcharge and cess. 78public expenditure and public revenue surcharge and cess surcharge is an additional tax on tax amount. this is imposed for a certain period of time. usually surcharge is imposed as a given percentage on the income tax. cess is an additional tax for meeting some special purpose of government. cess is withdrawn once sufficient revenue is

collected. education cess on income tax is an example. so far we have been discussing the tax revenue of the government. some of the taxes imposed by central, state and local self governments are given below. central government s tate government local self government corporate tax land tax property tax personal income tax stamp duty professional tax central gst ( cgst ) state gst ( sgst ) integrated gst ( igst ) with the help of reading materials find out major taxes imposed by state government. we have understood the revenue sources of government, i. e.

taxes. now let us think the non tax revenue sources of the government. sources of non - tax revenue fees fines and penalties grants fees is the reward collected for the government ' s services. license fees, registration fees, tuition fees, etc. are examples. fines and penalties are punishments for violating the laws. grants are the financial aid provided by one government or organisations for meeting a specific objective. for example, grants are provided by central and state governments to local self governments. 79 public expenditure and public revenue

y ear internal debt external debt total debt ( rupees ( rupees ( rupees in crores ) in crores ) in crores ) 2012 - 13 3764456 177288 3941744 2013 - 14 4240766 184580 4424346 2014 - 15 4775900 194286 4970186 2015 - 16 5298216 205459 5503675 2016 - 17 5741710 408108 6149818 2017 - 18be 6180027 423897 6603924 status paper on government debt ( feb. 2018 ) ( www. dea. gov. in ) profit interest government receive interest for loans given to various enterprises, agencies and countries. profit is the net income received from the enterprises operated by the government. for example, profit from the indian railways.

visit your local self government institution and prepare a report on the grants they receive. when public income is insufficient to meet the expenditure, governments resort to borrowing. public debt public debts are loans taken by the government. loans are availed from within and outside the country. these are known as internal debt and external debt respectively. internal debt internal debts are the loans availed by the government from individuals and institutions within the country. external debt external debts are the loans availed from foreign governments and international

institutions. the table shows the internal and external debt of india form 2012 - 13 to 2017 - 18. how much did public debt increase in 2017 - 18 compared to 2012 - 13? what conclusion can be arrived at while comparing internal debt with external debt? 80public expenditure and public revenue source : central budget 2017 - 18 ( revised estimate ) www. indiabudget. gov. in reasons for the increase in india ' s public debt are given below. increased defence expenditure increase in population social welfare activities developmental activities calculate the annual per capita debt of india.

statistics shows that india ' s public debt is increasing. discuss the advantages and disadvantages of this and report the findings. public finance public finance is the branch of economics that relates to public income, public expenditure and public debt. public finance is presented through the budget. budget budget is the financial statement showing the expected income and expenditure of the government during a financial year. in india, financial year is from april 1 to march 31. budgets are of three types. when income and expenditure are equal, it is called a balanced

budget. when income is more than expenditure, it is called surplus budget. when expenditure is more than income, it is called deficit budget. let ' s examine the major items of expenditure included in india ' s 2017 - 18 budget. items expenditure ( in crores ) interest and repayment 530843 defence 267108 subsidies 229716 pension 147387 social services ( education, health, 173691 social welfare ) economic services ( agriculture, industry, 231673 trade, energy, transport ) interest 530843 rural development, urban development 176358 other public services 460974 total expenditure 2217750 81

public expenditure and public revenue central budget 2017 - 18 non tax revenue interest profit grant other receipts central budget 2017 - 18 tax revenue corporate tax personal income tax customs duty excise duty gst other taxes 276995 135242 441255. 27 444631 563744. 73 84251. 15 3681 98758. 08 13550. 66 119983. 9 source : central budget 2017 - 18 ( revised estimate ) www. indiabudget. gov. in find out the following after observing the diagram. from which item does the central government receive maximum tax revenue? prepare a note by analysing the major items of expenditure of the

central government. observe the diagram related to the major income sources of the central budget 2017 - 18. 82public expenditure and public revenue which is the source of non tax revenue that yields maximum income to the central government? which source yields more income to the central government - tax revenue or non tax revenue? fiscal policy government ' s policy regarding public revenue, public expenditure and public debt is called fiscal policy. these policies are implemented through the budget. fiscal policy influences a country ' s progress. a sound fiscal policy helps in

nourishing the developmental activities and to attain growth. some of the goals of the fiscal policy are given below. attain economic stability create employment opportunities control unnecessary expenditure let ' s examine how the fiscal policy controls inflation and deflation which affect economic security. the tax rate is increased when there is inflation. as a result of this, the purchasing power of the people falls. for example, assume that tax rate is increased from ten percentage to twenty percentage. then, for rs. 100, the tax to be paid is rs. 20 and the consumer

can use only rs. 80. when the products cannot be sold in the market, prices fall. similarly, tax is reduced at the time of deflation. this will increase the purchasing power of the people. as a result the demand for products increases. this results in an increase in the price of the products. the timely application of fiscal policy helps the government to overcome such situations. how do public expenditure, public income and public debt benefit a country? discuss. 83 public expenditure and public revenue let us assess compare developmental and non - developmental

expenditure and give examples for each. describe the features of direct tax and indirect tax. what are the important functions of gst council. explain with examples public revenue and pubic expenditure. what are the sources of non tax revenue? rewrite if required : deficit budget : income = expenditure surplus budget : income < expenditure balanced budget : income > expenditure what is fiscal policy? explain its aims. public finance and fiscal policy determine a country ' s progress. substantiate. extended activities

from the central budget 2017 - 18 find out the tax revenue collected from gst. collect bills for the goods and services bought in your house for a month. do the following activities based on this. classify the bills into gst bills and non gst bills. calculate the amount paid from your house as gst. visit the website www. services. gst. gov. in click on search tax payer enter gst number in gstin / uin and collect the available information. 06. eyes in the sky and dat a analysis 95 07. india : the land of diversities. 111 08. resource wealth of india 137

09. financial institutions and services. 161 10. consumer : satisfaction and prot ection 181 9595eyes in the sky and analysis of information you have understood how the surface features of the earth are depicted on maps and analyzed. the advancements in the field of science and technology have made information gathering, map making, and subsequent analysis easier and more efficient. through this lesson you can understand how the launching of satellites and the use of computer softwares for the analysis of geo - spatial data make learning geography more human centered.

96 eyes in the sky and analysis of information remote sensing the invention of photography in the 19th century has brought about a drastic change in data collection. the possibility of capturing photographs from higher elevations mounting cameras on balloons and air crafts has been explored ever since. data collection using satellites began in 1960. along with cameras, different types of scanners were also introduced for data collection. such a method of collecting information about an object, place or phenomenon without actual physical contact is remote sensing.

devices used for data collection in remote sensing are called sensors. cameras and scanners are sensors. the sensors record the electromagnetic radiations reflected by objects. the carrier on which sensors are fixed is called a platform. sensors can be installed on balloons, air crafts and satellites. based on the source of energy and the platform remote sensing can be classified as follows. fig. 6. 1 remote sensing passive remote sensing remote sensing is carried out with the help of solar energy is known as passive remote sensing. here the sensors do not emit energy by itself.

active remote sensing remote sensing made with the aid of artificial source of energy radiating from the sensor is known as active remote sensing. an energy source is essential for remote sensing. this may be the solar energy containing electromagnetic radiation or an aritificial source of light. remote sensing is made possible either by utilizing the sunlight or an artificial light reflected from various objects. when photographs are taken by using a camera with flash, the camera is the sensor and the light beam from the flash is an artificial energy. the electromagnetic energy reflected and

radiated by objects is utilized in remote sensing technology. fig. 6. 3 fig. 6. 2 classification of remote sensing based on source of energy 9797eyes in the sky and analysis of information classification of remote sensing based on the platform fig. 6. 4 fig. 6. 6 fig. 6. 5 terrestrial photography the method of obtaining the earth ’ s topography using cameras from the ground is known as terrestrial photography. aerial remote sensing the method of obtaining photographs of the earth ’ s surface continously from the sky by using cameras mounted on aircrafts is known as aerial remote sensing.

satellite remote sensing the process of gathering information using the sensors installed in artificial satellites is known as satellite remote sensing. you have understood the different methods of remote sensing. don ’ t we take the photographs of landscape during picnic? what type of remote sensing is this? aerial remote sensing aerial remote sensing is generally used to gather information about comparatively smaller areas. the advantage of aerial remote sensing is that information of any region can be gathered in accordance with our requirements. another merit

of this method is that contiguous pictures of the areas along the path of the air crafts are made available. the photographs 98 eyes in the sky and analysis of information obtained through this method are called aerial photographs. in each aerial photograph, nearly 60 % of the places depicted in the adjacent photo is included. this is done for ensuring contiguity and to obtain three dimensional vision with the help of stereoscope. this is called overlap in aerial photographs. look at the figure 6. 7 illustrating the concept of overlap. it can be seen that each photograph exhibits as much as 60

percentage area as repetition. major share of areas in the figure a are present in figure b and those of figure b are repeated in figure c. two such photographs of adjoining areas with overlap are called a stereo pair. figure a and b as well as b and c are stereo pairs respectively. the instrument which is used to obtain three dimensional view from the stereo pairs is called stereoscope ( fig. 6. 8 ) when viewed through a stereo scope, we get a three dimensional view of the area depicted in the setero pair. such a three dimensional view obtained is called stereoscopic vision. though figure 6. 8

land surface camera a b c figure 6. 7 9999eyes in the sky and analysis of information as the aerial photographs are highly useful for viewing a re - gion as a whole and for distinguishing the heights and depressions of the earth ' s surface aerial photographs were used widely since the second world war. aerial photographs are also used for the preparation of topo - graphical maps. aerial photography started in india after independence. the responsibility of aerial survey in india has been vested with the indian air force, indian aerospace company based in kolkata and the

national remote sensing centre. the shaking of air crafts affects the quality of photos. it is not practical to take photographs of regions that are vast and extensive. the aircrafts require open space for takeoff and landing. landing the air crafts frequently for refueling increases the cost. satellite remote sensing the process of collecting information using sensors fixed on artificial satellites is called satellite remote sensing. the artificial satellites are mainly divided into two types : geostationary satellites and sun synchronous satellites.

aerial remote sensing has several advantages they have some limitations as well. let ’ s see what they are. with the advent of remote sensing using artificial satellites these limitations have been overcome to a great extent. now let us understand the method of remote sensing by using artificial satellites. 100 eyes in the sky and analysis of information these are the satellites that move in equal velocity with the earth ’ s rotation. ( fig. 6. 9 ) the features of these satellites are given below : $ they orbit the earth at an elevation of about 36000 kilometres above the earth.

$ one third of the earth comes under its field of view. $ as the movement of these satellites corresponds to the speed of rotation of the earth, it stays constantly above a specific place on the earth. $ this helps in continuous data col - lection of an area. $ it is used in telecommunication and for weather studies. $ india ’ s insat satellites are examples of geo - stationary satellites. sun synchronous satellites are the artificial satellites that passes around the earth along the poles ( fig. 6. 10 ). the features of these satellites are given below : $ the orbit of these satellites is about

900 km in altitude. $ the surveillance area is less than that of the geostationary satellites. $ the repetitive collection of informa - tion of a region at regular interval is possible. $ used for the collection of data on natural resources, land use, ground water etc. $ these satellites are mainly used for remote sensing purposes. $ satellites in irs, landsat series are examples of sun synchronous satellites. geostationary satellites sun synchronous satellites figure 6. 9 figure 6. 10 $ with the help of the internet collect the details of the geo – stationary and sun

synchronous satellites launched by india and prepare notes. $ to collect more information log on to www. isro. gov. in and www. landsat. usgs. gov. haven ' t you understood that the information about the earth ’ s surface is collected with the help of sensors. 101101eyes in the sky and analysis of information sensors record the electromagnetic radiation either reflected or emitted by the objects. each object on the surface of the earth reflects electromagnetic radiation in different measures. for example, the energy reflection of plants is different from that of the water

bodies. the amount of reflected energy by each object is called the spectral signature of that object. the sensors on artificial satellites distinguish objects on the earth ’ s surface based on their spectral signature and transmit the information in digital format to the terrestrial stations. this is interpreted with the help of computers and converted in to picture formats. these are called satellite imageries. fig 6. 11. the size of the smallest object on the earth ’ s surface that a satellite sensor can distinguish is called the spatial resolution of the sensor.

look at the figures ( fig. 6. 12 – a and b ). these are the satellite imageries captured by two sensors with different spatial resolution. can we see the features on the earth ’ s surface with greater clarity in figure 6. 12 b than in figure 6. 12 a? which of these sensors took images with better spatial resolution? spatial resolution – i kilometre spatial resolution – i metre figure 6. 12ab figure 6. 11 what kind of change that you can find in satellite imageries as the spatial resolution decreases? 102 eyes in the sky and analysis of information name of some satellites and their spa -

tial resolution are given below : the clarity of satellite imageries differ as spatial resolutions varies. with the help of the internet observe the satellite imageries provided by different satellites and compare the clarity in imageries based on their spatial resolution. uses of remote sensing technology $ for the assessment of weather and its observations $ for ocean explorations $ to understand the land use of an area. $ for the monitoring of flood and drought $ for identifying forest fires in deep forests and to adopt controlling measures $ to collect data regarding the

extent of crops and spread of pest attack $ for oil explorations $ to locate ground water potential places $ you have understood that a large amount of information about the earth is received through remote sensing technology. we can prepare maps, tables and graphs to remote sensing in india photo interpretation institute was established at dehradum in 1966 for analyzing and studying aerial photographs. later this institution becomes indian institute of remote sensing ( iirs ). the satellite remote sensing in india began with launch of the satellites bhaskara i and ii in 1970.

institutions like national remote sensing centre ( nrsc ) ( erstwhile nrsa ), indian space research organization ( isro ), department of space ( dos ) and space application centre ( sac ) are constantly engaged in making use of remote sensing for the welfare of the society. the complete responsibility of collecting, storing processing and distributing the data made available by indian remote sensing satellites are vested in the hands of national remote sensing centre whose head quarter is at hyderabad ( nrsc ) https : / / nrsc. gov. in. find scientific answers to our quiries by the analysis of the

information obtained through remote sensing and other means, using a computer based technology called geographic information system. satellite sensors spatial resolution ( in square meter ) landsat multi spectral 79 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 scanner spot panchromatic 20 camera irs pan liss - iii 5. 8 geo eye panchromatic 0. 46 multi spectral camera 103103eyes in the sky and analysis of information geographic information system - gis geographic information system is a computer based information management system by which the data collected from the

sources of information like maps, aerial photographs, satellite imageries, tables, surveys etc. are incorporated in to the computer using softwares, which are retrieved, analyzed and displayed in the form of maps, tables and graphs. fig. 6. 13 shows the different stages in geographic information system. entering basic data in to computer using data input devices like cds ' and scanners is the first step. various layers can be created based on the collected data with the help of geographic information system softwares. the analyzed data can be

converted in accordance with our needs in to products either in the form of maps, tables or digital data. all data analysis with gis are done based on two kinds of data. let us have a look at them. figure 6. 13 104 eyes in the sky and analysis of information 1. spatial data find out the latitudinal and longitudinal location of our country with the help of the website bhuvan ( https : bhuvan – app i. nrse. gov. in ) or with an atlas. each feature on the surface of the earth has a location of its own. such features of the earth ' s surface having a specific location an known are spatial data.

find out the latitudinal and longitudinal location of your school with the help of bhuvan and write here. latitude : longitude : 2. attributes the additional information about the characteristics of each spatial data on the earth ’ s surface are called attributes. the attributes can be combined with spatial data. find out the following details of your school. number of teachers : number of class rooms : number of students : whether your school building is multi storied or single? : yes / no the details you recorded are the attributes of your school. if we

can collect and include the spatial data and attributes of places in the data base, the gis can give precise and scientific answers to the various queries about that place. layers observe the portion of a topographic map shown in the figure 6. 14. haven ' t you see the natural and manmade features like streams, roads, vegetation, buildings etc on the map? can we separate the features one by one to make separate maps. this is possible through gis. you can see ( fig. 6. 14 ) that water channels, roads etc shown separately in the figure. the thematic maps

prepared and stored in geographic information system for analytical purpose are called layers. the spatial relationship 105105eyes in the sky and analysis of information among the features on the surface of the earth can easily be understood by analyzing the appropriate layers. layers of the topographical maps figure 6. 14 in the given figure ( fig : 6. 14 ) parts of drainage network near a reservoir are shown. can you find out the different layers that have been used here? find out the other possible layers from the given topographic map? analytical capabilities of gis

the surface features of the earth collected as spatial data and attributes can be analyzed in various ways by the gis. network analysis, buffer analysis and overlay analysis are the important analytical capabilities of gis. nt - 875 - 2 - soc. sci. - ii - 10 - e - vol. 2 106 eyes in the sky and analysis of information overlay analysis overlay analysis is used for understanding the mutual relationship among the various features on the earth ’ s surface and the periodic changes undergone by them. overlay analysis is helpful in understanding the changes in the area of crops, the changes in land use etc.

for example. if we want to understand the changes in the area under paddy cultivation in thrissur district by the year 2015 compared to 2000, all we have to do is to overlay the land use maps of thrissur in the corresponding years. buffer analysis suppose if we want to find out the number of houses located within three kilometre radius of your school, the possibility of buffer analysis can be used effectively. if the spatial data of the place where your school is located is subjected to buffer analysis in gis, a circular area with 3 km radius can be created around

your school so as to find out the number of houses in that area. ( fig 6. 15 ) suppose a road in your region is widening from 5 m to 8 m as per the government decision. in such a situation, a zone of required width is created along the existing road by using the possibility of buffer analysis in gis. thus we can easily determine how much land has to be acquired and how many people will become homeless. a circular zone created around a point feature or a parallel zone created aside a linear feature in buffer analysis is called buffer zone. figure 6. 16 figure 6. 15

107107eyes in the sky and analysis of information network analysis in contrast to the other two types of analysis, the network analysis deals only with linear features on a map. linear features include roads, railways lines and rivers etc. the possibilities of network analysis can be used to find out the easiest and less congested roads from one place to another. the possibilities of this analysis can also be used by tourists to plan the maximum number of attractive destinations in the available time. this may also help to bring an accident victim

to a suitable hospital through less congested roads. use of gis by using gis, we can $ compile data from different sources $ update and incorporate data easily $ conduct thematic studies $ represent geographic features spatially $ generate visual models of future phenomena and processes based on the data collected $ prepare maps, tables, and graphs $ satellite based navigation system nowadays satellite - based tracking systems are used for monitoring the location and movement of objects on the earth ' s surface. it is used in several sectors like map making,

transportation etc. the most important among this is the global positioning system of the united states of america. global positioning system ( gps ) the global positioning system helps sensing the latitudinal and longitudinal location and elevation of objects on the earth ' s surface along with the corresponding time. in this system a series of 24 satellites placed at six different orbits between the altitudes 20000 and 20200 km above the earth ' s surface locate objects. we can locate places with the help of the figure 6. 17 108 eyes in the sky and analysis of information

signals received from the satellites in our handheld device. the gps requires signals from at least four satellites to display information like the latitude, longitude, elevation, time, etc. in it. more satellites are being included in this system for enhancing accuracy. though started initially for the u. s. defence, this facility is now open to the public since 1980. list the other potentials of gps. indian regional navigation satellite system ( irnss ) the state - of - the art satellite - based navigation system developed by india is indian regional navigation satellite

system. apart from india a radius of 1500 kilometers including the indian ocean and countries like pakistan and china come under its surveillance. school bhuvan school bhuvan is a map based e - learning portal for the students which provides awareness on country ' s natural resources, environment and their role in sustainable development. it is an initiative of the isro with national council of educational research and training. learners can avail this facility by clicking the icon " school bhuvan " on bhuvan web portal. my map create a map / gis is a mapping tool available on bhuvan web portal for

preparing maps of any region in india by obtaining the details of the surface features with the help of gis technology. will you prepare a map of your region by using this service with the help of your teacher? now onwards it is bhuvan. bhuvan is a satellite based geo - portal platform developed by the isro for the pur - pose of preparing maps of indian territory by using its own satellites. bhuvan made its humble beginning in march 2009. basically it is a remote sensing image portal. the prime function of bhuvan is to prepare online maps by the maximum utilization of gis and

remote sensing technologies. satellites belonging to irs service are used for data collection. the map making facilities available with bhuvan are more effective than that of the google earth and wiki mapia. bhuvan can prepare very precise maps since the spatial resolution of the photographs made available by bhuvan is 10 metres. let us have a glance at the services provided by bhuvan. the following facilities can be availed by visiting the web portal https : / / bhuvan - app1. nrsc. gov. in. bhuvan 2d - it provides 2d visualization of indian terrain.

bhuvan 3d - it enables 3 dimensional visualization of the features on the earth surface. information related to climate and environment. disaster management support services. ocean services. services related to agriculture. 109109eyes in the sky and analysis of information gis is one of the fastest developing technologies. this technology is being effectively applied in various fields like industry, education, agriculture, planning, irrigation, forestry, transportation, disaster management, disease

control, market analysis, tax collection, defence, tourism, natural resource management etc. gis has now become one of the most useful technologies in trade, communication, resource management, and planning and development in particular. the wide use of gis technology give way to tremendous job opportunities in this field. many world class institutions conduct various courses and training programmes in geo - informatics which includes gis technology, remote sensing and so on. candidates can grab better job opportunities by taking part in such courses and training programmes.

the details of some institution in india conducting such courses are given below indio institute of remote sensing ( www. iirs. gov. in ) survey of india ( www. surveyofindia. gov. in ) iits in india like iit kharagpur - earth science ( www. iitkgp. ac. in ) iit kanpur - earth science ( www. iitk, ac. in / es / ) flood control in the contemporary history of kerala, it has witnessed the most devastating monsoon flood in the year 2018. the intensity of the flood faced by our state and the damages it caused are inexplicable. the possibility of satellite remote sensing has been

utilized very effectively to overcome this natural disaster. we used this technology for the preparation of flood hazard maps of affected areas, estimation of loss due to flood, understanding the post flood conditions of rivers and the assessment of damages of the areas flooded. the details of the surface features collected through remote sensing can be analyzed with the help of gis to prepare flood predicting models by identifying areas vulnerable to flood. the world is fast leaping towards progress. the relentless quest for knowledge and the untiring efforts of man are the base for

all these advancements. new discoveries and advancements in technology have made human life better. hope you will also 110 eyes in the sky and analysis of information let us assess compare active remote sensing and passive remote sesing. what is the use of overlap in aerial photographs? briefly explain geostationary and sun synchronous satellites. list out the fields where remote sensing is used. what is the merit in using layers in gis? write down the possibilities of overlay analysis. get involve in the efforts to make use of the technological progress

for the welfare of mankind. location of india latitude : 8°4 ' to 37°6 ' north longitude : 68°7 ' to 97°25 ' east indian peninsula a peninsula is the land surrounded by ocean on three sides. the southern part of the indian sub continent is surrounded by oceans and hence it is known as indian peninsula. the lines you have read is from the famous book ' devabhoomiyiloode ' written by sri. m k ramachandran, the renowned traveller and writer who has made numerous journeys along the himalayan ranges. what is mentioned here is the moun - tain topography extending along the

northern border of india. india ' s topography is diverse. huge rivers originating from the snow clad mountains and discharging into the sea after flowing through vast plains we were then camping above 16, 000 ft. leaning on a rock, i observed the atmosphere and surroundings. the mountain ranges stood like a fort around us. beyond them were the sparkling snow clad peaks mountains everywhere. spread one after the other. lush green meadows and perilously steep paths. the cold began to get more intense. after sipping negi ' s tea for a while, i returned to the cave.

devabhoomiyiloode - m k ramachandran ( a translation ) 112india : the land of diversities expansive agricultural plains, extensive plateaus, scorching deserts, elongated coastal plains, a number of islands …! the diversities of our country are really enchanting. this chapter deals with these diversities. pamir plateau - the roof of the world the pamir plateau situated in central asia is known as the roof of the world. the mountain ranges such as hindukush, sulaiman, tien shan, kunlun, karakoram, etc. radiate to different directions from the pamir knot. the kailas ranges in tibet are an

extension of the karakoram mountain ranges. in the himalayas observe fig 8. 1. we can see a number of mountain ranges to the northern side of india. these mountain ranges starting from the north west of kashmir and extending up to the eastern boundary of india is known as the northern mountains. the northern mountains that function as a great wall can be classified into the trans himalayas, himalayas and the eastern highlands. ( table 7. 1 ). find answers to the following questions with the help of an atlas. the countries belonging to the indian sub continent.

countries sharing land frontier with india. the countries sharing ocean frontier with india. pamir hindukush kunlun kailasranges sulaiman fig 7. 1 3 2 1 4 a b c i ii iii india northern mountain ranges india : the land of diversities 113 mountain ranges belonging to the northern mountains are shown in the table. write the names of these ranges at appropriate places in the given map ( fig 7. 1 ). trans himalayas trans himalayas include karakoram, ladakh, and zaskar mountain ranges. mount k2 ( 8661m ) also known as godwin austin, the highest peak in india, is in the karakoram range.

the average height of the trans himalayas is 6000 metres. himalayas the himalayan mountain range forms an arc shaped physical division extending between the north - west trans himalayas and the south - east eastern highlands. these mountain ranges have a length of about 2400 kilometres. many of the world ' s highest peaks are situated here. the height of these mountains tend to decrease towards the east. the width of these mountain ranges is just about 150 kilometre in arunachal pradesh, whereas it is around 400 kilometre in the kashmir region. this physical division extending over 5 lakh square

kilometres comprises of three parallel mountain ranges. let us see the characteristic features of each. trans himalayas himalayas eastern highlands ( a ) karakoram ( i ) himadri ( 1 ) patkai bum ( b ) ladakh ( ii ) himachal ( 2 ) naga hills ( c ) zaskar ( iii ) siwaliks ( 3 ) garo, khasi, and jaintia hills ( 4 ) mizo hills table 7. 1 northern mountain region mount everest mount everest, the highest peak in the world is in the himalayas. it is situated in nepal and has an altitude of 8848m. 114india : the land of diversities himachal situated to the south of the himadri. average altitude is 3000 metres.

the hill stations like shimla, darjeeling, etc. are situated in the southern slopes of this range. siwaliks situated to the south of the himachal. average altitude is 1220 metres. as the himalayan rivers cut across this range, its continuity breaks at many places. broad flat valleys seen along these ranges are called duns. ( eg : dehradun ) himadri the highest mountain range. average altitude is 6000 metres. origin of the rivers ganga and brahmaputra. has a number of peaks above 8000 metres ( eg : kanchenjunga, nandadevi ) passes across the northern mountain region

passes are the comparatively narrow natural passages across the moun - tain ranges. these mountain passages have a significant role in linking the cultures prevailing on both sides of these sky scraping mountain ranges. passes places connected lipu lekh uttarkhand - tibet shipki la himachal pradesh - tibet soji la srinagar - kargil nathu la sikkim - tibet india : the land of diversities 115 in accordance with altitude a wide variety of vegetation prevails here. oak, chestnut, maple etc. are seen at an altitude of 1000 to 2000 metres and above this are the coniferous trees such as

deodar, spruce, etc. eastern highlands you have marked the major hills belonging to the eastern highlands in the outline map ( fig 7. 1 ). this region which is at an altitude of 500 to 3000 metres is also known as purvachal. cherrapunji, the place receiving the highest rainfall in the world is situated here. this region is covered by dense tropical rainforests. find out the states along the eastern highlands with the aid of an atlas. mark the mountain ranges belonging to the northern mountains in the outline map of india. birth of the himalayas scientists are of the view that the

northern mountains were formed as a result of convergence and the re - sultant folding up of the bed of the ocean named tethys which was situ - ated between the indian plate and the eurasian plate. the fossils of marine creatures excavated from here sup - port this argument. the soil generally found in the northern mountain region is fertile mountain soil. human life in the lap of the himalayas the major means of livelihood is animal rearing that depends purely on the grasslands here. sheep are commercially reared in kashmir and himachal. the valleys of siwaliks have been

formed by the deposition of alluvium brought down by the himalayan rivers. apart from potato, barley, and saffron, fruits like apple and orange are cultivated here. the largest production of tea in india comes from assam mountain ranges. the northern mountains are described as the paradise of tourists due to its natural beauty. hill stations like shimla, darjeeling, kulu, manali, etc. are situated here. 116india : the land of diversities find out the major himalayan rivers, the states through which they flow, and their tributaries with the help of

the map provided ( fig 7. 2 ) and complete table 8. 2. don ' t forget to refer the atlas. the gaumukh cave from where the ganga originated manasarovar lake significance of the northern mountains let us see the role played by these mountain ranges in moulding the climate and human life of india. have been protecting us from foreign invasions from the north since ancient times. block the monsoon winds and cause rainfall throughout north india. prevent the dry cold winds blowing from the north from entering india during winter. caused the emergence of diverse flora and fauna.

source region of rivers. the snow - clad peaks and glaciers in the himalayas are rich sources of fresh water. numerous great rivers take birth through the confluence of streams originating from the melting snow. these rivers are known as himalayan rivers. they are also enriched by the copious rain along the valleys. following are the major himalayan rivers. indus ganga brahmaputra a tea plantation in assam safffron cultivation in kashmir in bangladesh we call brahmaputra as jamuna in tibet we call brahmaputra as tsangpo india : the land of diversities 117 fig. 7. 2

bay of bengalarabian sea indian ocean srilanka nepal bhutan bangladesh myanmar china tibet pakistan lakshadweep andaman and nicobar islands afghanistan indus jhelum chenab ravi beas sutlej gangayamuna chambal ken son gomathyghagharagandak kosi damodar betwa brahmaputra hoogly tista manas subansiri luhith mahanadi krishna godavari cauvery narmada tapti india rivers thungabhadra godavari penganga luni wular lake gangothri lake manasarovar tsangpo ganga 118india : the land of diversities along the plains. the fertile land extending across seven north indian states forms

the northern great plains. himalayan rivers himalayan origin length t ributaries states thr ough sea which rivers which it flows it joins indus manasarovar about 2880 km jhelum arabian sea lake in tibet ( only 709 km of this river flows through india ) ganga gaumugh about 2500 km yamuna bay of bengal caves in the gangothri glacier brahmaputra chema - yung - about 2900 km tista bay of bengal dung glacier ( only 725 km in tibet in india ) table 7. 2 fig. 7. 3 india : the land of diversities 119 from the given map ( fig 7. 3 ) locate the northern great plains and

list the states across which it is spread. west bengal bihar you have learnt that the himalayas have been formed by the folding up of lithospheric plates due to convergence. during the formation of the himalayas, a huge depression of more than 2000 metre depth took shape along the south parallel to the himalayas. this extensive plain took shape as a result of the continuous deposition by the rivers flowing down from the himalayas for thousands of years. this plain, extending over seven lakh square kilometres and with kilometres of thick sediments, is one among

the few extensive alluvial plains of the world. this plain is generally known as the indus - ganga - brahmaputra plain. the highly fertile alluvial soil is a characteristic feature of this plain. where else can alluvial soil be found in india? the river borne plains the northern plains are classified based on the sediments deposited by different rivers. name of the plain river causing deposition punjab - haryana plain river indus and its tributaries marusthali - baagar plain of rajasthan luni and saraswathi rivers ganga plainriver ganga and its tributaries

brahmaputra plain of assam river brahmaputra and its tributries refer atlas and identify the physical divisions located on either sides of the northern plains. mark the location of the northern plains in the outline map of india. 120india : the land of diversities the granary of india a variety of crops such as wheat, maize, rice, sugarcane, cotton, pulses, etc. are cultivated here. this region is known as the granary of india. the northern great plain is one of the most densely populated regions in the world. the network of roads, rails and canals are largely concentrated

in the northern plains. why? rainfall is scarce along the western parts of the northern plains. that is why most regions in rajasthan are deserts. this desert is known as thar desert. river luni and the long vanished river saraswathy have had significant role in the formation this portion of the plain. thar desert population is sparse in this region. why? fig 7. 4 dry and salty desert soil is found in this region. thorns and bushes form the natural vegetation here. you might remember that kerala receives more rainfall within a day than the annual rainfall received in rajasthan. what you

see in fig 7. 4 are common scenes in the thar desert. bajra, jowar, etc. are the main crops cultivated in rajasthan. these crops require very little amount of water to grow. here cultivation is done mainly with the help of irrigation. the punjab plain is an extensive plain formed by the deposition of the indus and its tributaries. major crops here are wheat, maize, and sugarcane. india : the land of diversities 121 aravalli ranges india peninsular plateau aravalli ranges kachchh peninsula kathiawar peninsula malwa plateau satpura range deccan plateau chota nagapur plateau

eastern ghats western ghats vindhya range prepare a seminar paper on the topic ' influence of the northern great plains in the agricultural economy of india ' and present in the class. you can collect more information from the media and other reading materials. the peninsular plateau entire portions of madhya pradesh, jharkhand and chhattisgarh as well as parts of maharashtra, karnataka, tamil nadu, telengana, odisha and west bengal together form a plateau known as the peninsular plateau. the peninsular plateau made of hard crystalline rocks forms

the oldest and the most extensive physical division of india. major features of the peninsular plateau are shown in the map ( fig 7. 5 ). read the map and list out these features. fig. 7. 5 nt - 875 - 3 - soc. sci. - ii - 10 - e - vol. 2 122india : the land of diversities mark the major features of the peninsular plateau in the outline map of india. this undulating physical division of india extends about 15 lakh square kilometres. it includes varied topography such as mountains, plateaus, and valleys. the highest peak in this region is the anamudi ( 2695 m ) situated in the idukki district of kerala.

as the peninsular plateau holds numerous deposits of diverse minerals, this region can be termed as the store house of minerals. the major vegetation of this region receiving seasonal rain is tropical deciduous. the trees found in this region are teak, sal, sandalwood, bamboo, etc. but the rainy western slopes of the western ghats have tropical rain forests. a major portion of the deccan plateau, which is the southern part of the peninsular plateau, has been formed by the cooling of lava that spread over the region millions of years ago. black soil is

extensively found in this region made of igneous rocks, named basalt. as this soil is best suited for cotton cultivation, it is also called black cotton soil. red soil also occurs in large quantities. this soil formed by the weathering of igneous and metamorphic rocks is comparatively less fertile. the presence of iron gives red colour to this soil. laterite soil is formed in the regions with monsoon rains and intermittent hot seasons. the peninsular plateau is also the source region of many rivers. observe the map ( fig 7. 2 ) and find out the rivers flowing through the peninsular plateau.

mahanadi the rivers originating from the elevated regions of the peninsular plateau are known as peninsular rivers. as these are rain fed rivers, the water flow in these rivers decreases in summer. india : the land of diversities 123 observe the map ( fig 7. 2 ) and complete the table by classifying the peninsular rivers based on their direction of flow. west flowing rivers east flowing rivers narmada mahanadi some of the peninsular rivers are tributaries of the ganga and the yamuna. identify them with the help of the map ( fig 7. 2 ). river origin approximate major s tates sea which

length tributaries through it joins which it flows mahanadi maikala ranges 857 km ib, tel ( madhya pradesh ) godavari w estern ghats 1465 km indravathi, ( nasik district of sabari maharashtra ) krishna w estern ghats 1400 km bhima, ( mahabaleswar thungabhadra in maharashtra ) kaveri brahmagiri ranges 800 km kabani, in western ghats amaravathi ( karnataka ) narmada maikala ranges 1312 km hiran, banjan ( chhattisgarh ) tapti muntai plateau 724 km anar, ( baitul distruct in girna maharashtra ) table 7. 3 see the origin, length, and tributaries of major peninsular rivers

given in the table ( 7. 3 ). complete the table after identifying the states through which they flow and the sea which they join. 124india : the land of diversities jog falls himalayan rivers peninsular rivers originate from the himalayan mountain originate from the mountain ranges in ranges the peninsular plateau. extensive catchment area comparatively smaller catchment area intensive erosion intensity of erosion is less create gorges in the mountain region and do not create deep valleys as they flow meander in plains through hard and resistant rocks

high irrigation potential less irrigation potential navigable along the plains potential for inland navigation is low table 7. 4 most of the peninsular rivers enter the plains by forming waterfalls. why is it so? godavari is the longest among the peninsular rivers. waterfalls are common in most of the peninsular rivers. the highest among these is the jog falls ( 225 metres ) in the sharavathi river in karnataka. you might have understood the characteristics of the himalayan and peninsular rivers. let us have a comparative study of them. observe the table

india : the land of diversities 125 the names of some major towns and cities situated along the river banks are given below. prepare a table in the given format by identifying the river banks along which each is located. also locate these towns and cities in the outline map of india. new delhi, agra, devaprayag, varanasi, allahabad, patna, guwahati, kolkata, ludhiana, srinagar, ahmedabad, surat, vijayawada, thiruchirappalli, tanjavur, coorg. cities along river banks river new delhi y amuna along the beautiful coastlines. each sea coast in india is as vividly

picturesque as a painting in water colours. suppose you are travelling from west bengal to gujarat along these beautiful coasts. which are the states you would pass through? odisha human life in the plateau cotton, pulses, groundnut, sugarcane, maize, ragi, chilli, etc., are the major agricultural crops of this region. iron ore, coal, manganese, bauxite, limestone, etc. are the major minerals found here. hence agriculture, mining, and mineral based industries are the major economic activities. 126india : the land of diversities western coastal plain eastern coastal plain

between the arabian sea and the between the bay of bengal and the western ghats eastern ghats from the rann of kutchh to kanyakumari from the sundarban delta region to kanyakumari comparatively narrow comparatively wide can be divided into gujarat coast, can be divided into north zircar plain and konkan coast, and malabar coast coromandal coast backwaters and esturies are seen delta formation takes place the approximate length of this coast line is 6100 kilometres extending from the rann of kutchh in gujarat to the ganga - brahmaputra delta. the coastal

plain of india can be divided into two. familiarise the coastlines and their characteristic features by observing the table and the map. india : the land of diversities 127 alluvial soil is present throughout the coastal plains. rice, coconut, etc., are widely cultivated here. to our own islands. the lakshadweep islands are situated in the arabian sea at a distance of about 300 kilometres off shore from kochi. there are 36 islands in this island group, of which only 11 are inhabited. bangaram, kadamath, minicoy, kavarathi, agathi, androth,

kalpeni, aminidivi, chethlath, bithra and kilthan are the major islands. kavarathi is the capital of lakshadweep. deltas are commonly formed along the eastern coastal plain, but not along the west coastal plain. why is it so? mark the coastal plains in the outline map of india. human life along the coasts fishing is the main occupation of the people in the coastal plains. tourism also has great possibilities here. rice and coconut are the major agricultural crops along the west coast. rice is extensively cultivated in the basins of the mahanadi,

godavari, krishna, and kaveri along the east coast. 128india : the land of diversities an island lagoon in lakshadeep the natives of the andaman and nicobar group of islands lagoons, sandy beaches and coral reefs are the specialities of the lakshadweep island group. people depend largely on sea for their sustenance as agriculture is sparse here. fishing and tourism are the major sources of income. mark the lakshadweep islands in the outline map of india. let us get to know another island group. this group of islands is situated in the bay of bengal. the andaman and nicobar islands include

about 200 islands of andaman group and 19 islands of nicobar group. most of these islands are not inhabited. many of them have dense forests. the only volcano in india is situated in the barren island here. port blair is the capital of andaman and nicobar islands. the indira point at the southern most tip of the nicobar islands is considered as the southern end of india. mark the andaman and nicobar islands in the outline map of india. don ' t forget to name the map you have completed as ' india : physiography '. now you might have understood that india is divided into five major physiographic

divisions namely northern mountains, great northern plains, peninsular plateau, coastal plains, and islands and also that each of these divisions influence the life of people in india. india : the land of diversities 129 climate note the conversations of children from different places in india. it is clear from their conversations that the climate in india varies from place to place and time to time. like physiography, climate also is diverse. what causes this spatial diversity in climate? what factors are responsible for these differences in climate? let us find out.

the factors influencing the climate of india are : latitude physiography nearness to sea altitude the seasons in india can be generally classified into four. cold weather season hot weather season southwest monsoon season retreating monsoon season cold weather season " experienced heavy showers today. using the instrument called rain gauge we measured the rain and displayed it in the school notice board. " kerala - 15 june " it is so dry that even drinking water is scarce here. june is the hottest month. " rajasthan - 10 may " the one day cricket match supposed to be

conducted at the chinna swamy stadium, chennai has been postponed. we were really looking forward to see the match " tamil nadu - 20 november " cold is so severe here that the schools are closed for two days. this weather is said to be caused by the location of this place away from the sea. " rajasthan - 10 january december - january - february fig 7. 6 130india : the land of diversities haven ' t you seen the pictures ( fig 7. 6 )? these are some of the winter scenes of north india. you might have heard from the media about the extreme cold of north india. why is it so? india

experiences winter when the position of the sun is over the southern hemisphere. most places in india experience intense fog and snowfall occurs in the valleys of the himalayas during this season. 26. 50c 240c 180c 210c 200c 130c low pressure high pressure january fig 7. 7 not to scale which are the months of cold weather in india? see the map ( fig 7. 7 ). the average day temperature recorded in the month of january at different places in india are shown in the map. examine this to infer the pattern of change in temperature. why does the temperature decrease from south to north?

the coastal regions experience comparatively high temperature. why? during the cold weather season days are generally warm and nights are severely cold in north india. snowfall is a common phenomenon in the hill stations like manali and shimla. the phenomenon called western disturbance is another peculiarity of the season. the cyclones originating in the mediterranean sea during winter, gradually shifts towards the east and reaches india. this causes winter rainfall in the northern plains, especially in the punjab region. this rain is much beneficial for the winter crops. jet

india : the land of diversities 131 streams, the strong upper air currents in the troposphere have a significant role in bringing the western disturbance to india. hot weather season the pictures ( fig 7. 8 ) given here are some scenes of hot weather experienced in different parts of india. observe the map ( fig 7. 9 ) to understand the distribution pattern of temperature in may. isn ' t the temperature in north india very high compared to the southern regions located close to the sea? why does this happen? india experiences hot weather when the sun is over the northern hemisphere. it is in

barmer in western rajasthan that the highest temperature of summer is felt. loo, mango showers, etc. are some local winds experienced in india during this season. you have learnt about these winds in the earlier chapter. 230c 240c 280c 250c 290c 330c high pressure low pressure may fig 7. 9 not to scale march - april - may - june fig 7. 8 kalbaisakhi kalbaisakhi is the phenomenon of heavy showers with thunder occurring in the west bengal region during the hot weather season. roaring winds and hailstones are the characteristics of this rain. 132india : the land of diversities southwest monsoon season

observe the map ( fig 7. 10 ). the direction of the flow of the southwest monsoon winds is shown here. the highest rainfall season of india is caused by these winds. which months does india experience southwest monsoon? when the sun is over the northern hemisphere, north indian regions experience intense low pressure. owing to the high pressure over the oceans, wind blows from high pressure to low pressure regions, that is, from the indian ocean to the indian sub - continent. as the winds deflect towards right due to coriolis effect, they reach india as southwest monsoon winds.

june - july - august - september fig 7. 10 fig 7. 11 not to scale india : the land of diversities 133 because of the peculiar shape of the indian peninsula, the southwest monsoon winds bifurcate into two branches on entering the land. arabian sea branch bay of bengal branch the arabian sea branch that reaches the coast of kerala by early june causes heavy rainfall here. then it advances to the states of karnataka, goa, maharashtra, and gujarat and causes rainfall in the western parts. rainfall is comparatively less along the eastern slopes of the western ghats. why?

rainfall is scarce in the rajasthan region because the monsoon branch entering through gujarat blows parallel to the aravalli mountain ranges. by what name is the southwest monsoon rain known in kerala? the bay of bengal branch of the monsoon advances northward by absorbing more moisture from the bay of bengal. on reaching west bengal, crossing the sundarban delta, it bifurcates into two branches. one branch reaches the northeastern states through the brahmaputhra plains and causes heavy rainfall there. what is the role of eastern highlands in bringing heavy rainfall

to the northeastern states? the other branch enters the ganga plains and causes rainfall in west bengal, bihar, uttar pradesh, etc. this branch merging with the arabian sea branch in the punjab plains advances north further and causes heavy rainfall along the foothills of the himalayas. retreating monsoon season by the end of september, as the sun apparently shifts towards the southern hemisphere, intense high pressure develops over the northern plains. comparatively low pressure over the indian ocean causes wind to blow from the northern part of india 134india : the land of diversities

towards the indian ocean. look at the map ( fig 7. 12 ) to understand the direction of these winds. what causes the rightward deflection of these winds? these winds known as northeast monsoon winds are dry winds that do not generally cause any rain in india. this season termed as north east monsoon is actually a transition period between the rainy season and the forth coming winter. this season experienced during the months of october and november makes the days unbearable due to high temperature and humidity. this phenomenon is known as october heat.

the winds blowing from land to sea due to the attraction of low pressure over the bay of bengal takes a northeast to southwest direction. it absorbs moisture from the bay of bengal and causes rainfall along the coromandal coast, especially the tamil nadu coast. this is the main rainy season of tamil nadu, kerala and some parts of karnataka also receive northeast monsoon rains. by what name is the northeast monsoon rain known in kerala? fig 7. 12 not to scale distribution of rainfall in india observe the map ( fig 7. 13 ). this map is prepared based on the amount of rainfall received in india.

analyse the map and find answers to the following questions. places receiving more than 200 cm rainfall kerala places receiving less than 60 cm rainfall rajasthan reasons for these imbalances in the distribution of rainfall physiography india : the land of diversities 135 each of the geographical characteristics of india does justice to the title ' the land of diversities. ' these diversities persist in every aspect such as physiography, climate, lifestyle, culture, flora and fauna, natural resources, etc. and form the basis of

india ' s prosperity. it is our responsibility to safegaurd these diversities. fig 7. 13 136india : the land of diversities let us assess himalayan ranges are described as a natural barrier. justify the statement. list the differences between the peninsular and himalayan rivers. the northern plains are the backbone of the indian economy. write your inferences by analysing the statement. the northern plains of india are densely populated compared to other places. give reasons. extended activity observe the map and find out the neighbouring countries

of india sharing land frontier with one, two, three and four indian states respectively. prepare a flow chart to represent the physiographic divisions and subdivisions in india and display it in the classroom. some of the factors related to the development of india are shown in the collage above ( fig 8. 1 ). identify and list them. agriculture the physical features of india considerably influence these diverse human activities. we have discussed the physical characteristics of india in the previous chapter. india is blessed with diverse natural resources. extent

of land, physiographic characteristics, climate, soil types, etc. form the fig 8. 1 nt - 875 - 4 - soc. sci. - ii - 10 - e - vol. 2 138resource wealth of india basis of our resource potential. resource utilisation is as significant as resource availability for the development of the country. this chapter deals with the geographical characteristics of different sectors such as agriculture, mining, industry, transport, etc. that influence the economy of india. agriculture and agro - based industries india is an agricultural country. nearly two - third of our population

depends on agriculture for their livelihood. in addition to food crops, the agricultural sector also provides raw materials for some industries. crop diversity is a characteristic feature of india. what geographical factors are favourable for the cultivation of diverse crops in india? diverse topography as we know, the climatic conditions required for the cultivation of all the crops are not the same. we have different crops suited to each season. on the basis of the period of cultivation, we have three distinct cropping seasons - kharif, rabi, and zaid. observe the table

given below and examine the classification of the crops based on their cropping seasons. small grains are called millets. food crops such as jowar, bajra, ragi, etc. come under this category. cropping sowing harvesting major seasons period period crops june early november rice, maize, millets, kharif ( onset of monsoon ) ( end of monsoon ) cotton, jute, sugarcane, groundnut rabi november march wheat, tobacco, ( beginning of winter ) ( beginning of summer ) mustard, pulses zaid march june fruits, vegetables ( beginning of summer ) ( beginning of monsoon ) resource wealth of india 139

agriculture as culture agriculture is the purposeful utilisation of land for sustenance by man. agriculture has been the chief means for the livelihood of man since ancient times. the term agriculture in english has been derived from two latin words, ' ager ' and ' cultur '. ' ager ' means land and ' cultur ' means cultivation. in latin ' agercultur ' means agriculture. other than crop pro - duction, horticulture, animal husbandry, forestry, pisiculture, etc. also come under agriculture. agricultural crops the diverse agricultural crops of india can be classified as food crops and cash crops. the crops

which can directly be consumed as food are called food crops. cash crops are those having industrial and commercial significance. let us familiarise with the major food crops in india, their distribution and geographical requirements for the growth. rice rice, the staple food crop of india is a kharif crop. alluvial soil is most suitable for rice cultivation. rice requires high temperature ( above 24° c ) and a good amount of rainfall ( more than 150 cm ). rice is being cultivated in regions with less rainfall with the aid of irrigation.

rice is mostly cultivated in river basins and coastal plains. rice is also cultivated by making terraces along the slopes of siwaliks. the rice cultivating regions in india are shown in the map ( fig 8. 2 ). find out the states where rice is cultivated. 139 140resource wealth of india wheat wheat, the second major food crop produced in india is a rabi crop. well drained alluvial soil is ideal for wheat cultivation. the crop which is mainly cultivated in temperate regions requires 10°c to 26°c temperature and 75 cm of rainfall. fig. 8. 2 140 resource wealth of india 141

wheat cultivation in india is mainly dependent on irrigation as it is a winter crop. find out the wheat cultivating states in india from the map ( fig 8. 3 ). why don ' t we cultivate wheat in kerala? maize maize is the third major food crop produced in india. in india, maize is cultivated in both summer and winter. fig. 8. 3 142resource wealth of india cultivated in regions receiving an annual average rainfall of 75 cm. well drained fertile soil is ideal. maize is mostly cultivated in madhya pradesh, karnataka, rajasthan and uttar pradesh.

in addition to rice, wheat, and maize, the food crops in india also include barley, millets, pulses, etc. see how the cash crops in india are categorised. cotton cultivation and cotton textile industry observe the map ( fig 8. 4 ). cotton growing regions in india as well as the cotton textile industrial centres are shown in the map. find out the states where cotton is cultivated. frost free growing season, 20° to 30° celsius of temperature, and a small amount of annual rainfall are the geographical requirements for cotton cultivation. black soil and alluvial soil are most suitable.

cotton is known as ' universal fibre ', as it is used worldwide in the textile sector. india ranks fourth in cotton production. cotton textile industry is the largest agro - based industry in india. the first cotton textile mill was established at fort glastor near kolkata in 1818. however, large scale production started at mumbai in 1854. mumbai being the most important cotton textile centre in india, the city is termed as ' cottonopolis '. look at the favourable factors that helped mumbai to become the most important cotton textile centre.

easy availability of raw materials from neighbouring regions. cheap availability of power. export and import possibilities of the mumbai port. cash crops fibre crops eg : cotton, jute beverage crops eg ; tea, coffee spices eg : cardamom, pepper other crops eg : sugar cane, rubber resource wealth of india 143 fresh water availability. human resource availability. next to mumbai, ahmedabad in gujarat is a major cotton textile centre. identify the other cotton textile industrial centres from the map ( fig 8. 4 ). jute farming and jute industry

jute is another fibre crop in india. hot and humid conditions are ideal for its growth. high temperature and rainfall above 150 cm is essential for jute cultivation. well drained alluvial soil is required. the ganga - brahmaputra delta region of west bengal is the major jute producing region. jute cultivation is fig. 8. 4 144resource wealth of india mainly confined to west bengal, assam, and some parts of odisha. mark the jute cultivating states in an outline map of india and incorporate it in your map collection. jute and jute products from india are really significant in the international

trade due to its low cost. among the nations of the world, india ranks second in jute production. what all products can be made out of jute fibre? tea india is the largest producer of tea in the world. the tea plantations of india are confined to assam, west bengal, kerala, and tamil nadu. label the tea producing states in the outline map of india and incorporate it in your map collection. hill slopes having an annual rainfall range of 200 to 250 cm and 25° to 30° celsius of temperature are most favourable for tea plantations. well drained soil rich in humus content

is required for this plantation crop. the tender tea leaves collected from the plantations are processed in the nearby factories and marketed. tea is a major export commodity of india. tea is cultivated in idukki and wayanad districts of kerala. what are the factors favouring this? resource wealth of india 145 coffee india stands sixth in the production of coffee, which is a tropical plantation crop. coffee plantations of india are confined to the western ghat ranges of karnataka, kerala and tamil nadu. moderate temperature and high rainfall are the requirements for coffee cultivation.

india mainly produces the high quality coffee seed namely ' arabica, ' which has great demand in the international market. two - third of the total production is from karnataka. after harvesting the coffee beans, they are processed in the factories and marketed. mark the coffee producing states in the outline map of india and incorporate in the map collection. spices india is famous for spices like cardamom, pepper, nutmeg, clove, ginger, etc. right from the ancient times. sugarcane cultivation and sugar industry sugarcane, which is a tropical crop, requires hot and humid climate.

black soil and alluvial soil are ideal for sugarcane cultivation. india ranks second in the production of sugarcane. what was the role of spices in attracting europeans to india? plantations of spices are concentrated mostly to the ranges of the western ghats. here, the favourable factors are well drained forest soil or sandy soil and the tropical climate with large amount of rainfall. 146resource wealth of india sugar mills are concentrated in sugarcane producing regions. why? in the map given ( fig 8. 5 ), you might have noticed the sugar mills shown along with the

sugarcane cultivating regions. the sugarcane harvested must be immediately brought to the factories so as to extract the juice out of it. otherwise the amount of sucrose in the sugarcane might decrease. fig. 8. 5 resource wealth of india 147 uttar pradesh is the leading producer in both sugarcane and cane sugar. in india both sugar and jaggery are produced from sugarcane. find out the states producing sugarcane by analysing the map ( fig 8. 5 ). rubber rubber cultivation requires temperature above 25° celsius and rainfall of more tham 150 cm. lateriate soil which is

generally not suitable for other crops is good for rubber. kerala is the leading producer of rubber in india. it is a major source of income in kerala. rubber is cultivated on a small scale in certain parts of tamil nadu and the andaman and nicobar islands. the fall in the price of rubber affects kerala the most. why? list out the major agro - based industries in india. minerals and mineral based industries india is blessed with a wide variety of mineral resources. most of the mineral resources of india are found in the igneous and metamorphic rocks of the peninsular

plateau. mineral resources provide raw materials to mineral based industries, just as agricultural crops contribute to agro - based industries. it is the mineral resources that form the industrial base of india. let us see how the major minerals are classified. rubber from abroad brazil is the birth place of rubber. it was sir. william henry, a british, who first brought rubber seeds to india in 1875. the rubber cultivation, started along the hill slopes of central travancore, spread to the northern districts as a result of the migration to malabar. 148resource wealth of india

metallic minerals are the sources of metals which can be classified into ferrous metals and non ferrous metals. let us discuss some major minerals and associated industries in india. iron ore deposits and iron and steel industries iron is extracted from iron ore. there are four types of iron ores found in india, namely, magnetite, haematite, limonite, and siderite. nearly 20 % of the total iron ore reserves in the world is in india. india ranks fourth in iron ore export. 50 - 60 % of the iron ore mined in india is exported to japan, korea, european countries,

the gulf countries, etc. there has been a drastic increase in the domestic consumption of iron ore. look at the table to understand the major iron ore mining regions in india. state major mining centres odisha sundargarh, mayurbhanj, jhar jharkhand singhbhum, durg karnataka bellary, chikmagalur, shimoga, chitradurga goa marmagao tamil nadusalem, nilgiris the iron and steel industry is the largest mineral based industry minerals non - metallic minerals ferrous metals non ferrous metals metallic minerals other minerals eg : iron ore, manganese eg : gold, silver, copper, bauxite mineral fuels

eg : coal, petroleum eg : mica resource wealth of india 149 in india. iron ore, coal, manganese, limestone, dolomite, etc. are the raw materials required for iron and steel industries. coal is also a major raw material for the iron and steel industry. the advantageous location of iron ore mines close to the coal mines in india has much industrial significance. other than the raw materials mentioned above, the availability of water, transportation facilities, export facilities, availability of labour, etc. are also considered while setting up of iron and steel industries.

details regarding the major iron and steel industries are given in the table. iron and steel plant tata iron and steel company ltd. ( tisco ) indian iron and steel company ( iisco ) visweswarayya iron and steel ltd. ( visl ) hindustan steel limited, ( hsl ) bhilai hindustan steel limited, ( hsl ) rourkela hindustan steel limited, ( hsl ) durgapur hindustan steel limited, ( hsl ) bokaro place of location jamshedpur ( jharkhand ) kulti, burnpur, hirapur ( west bengal ) bhadravathi ( karnataka ) durg ( chhattisgarh ) sundargarh ( odisha ) durgapur ( west bengal ) bokaro ( jharkhand ) features

largest private sector iron and steel plant. first public sector iron and steel company. first iron and steel plant in south india. established in collaboration with russia in 1959. established in collaboration with germany in 1959. established in collaboration with the uk in 1962. established in collaboration with russia in 1964. manganese manganese is a metallic mineral largely used in the iron and steel industry. manganese deposits are generally found near iron ore mines. odisha is the leading producer. karnataka, maharashtra,

mark the location of major iron and steel industries in the outline map of india and incorporate in the map collection. 150resource wealth of india and madhya pradesh are the other major manganese producing states. manganese is used to make ferro alloys. observe the table to know about some other minerals in india. in the outline map of india, mark the places of occurrences of the minerals which you have got to know from the table and incorporate the same in the map collection. minerals uses major producing states gold for making jewellery karnataka

silver for making jewellery, in electro - plating, rajasthan, jharkhand, in photography karnataka copper conductor in electrical goods jharkhand, rajasthan, industries madhya pradesh bauxite ore of aluminium. used for making jharkhand, chhattisgarh, aircrafts, electrical equipments, madhya pradesh, odisha domestic utensils, etc. mica used as insulator in electrical industries. andhra pradesh, rajasthan, jharkhand, bihar mineral fuels we depend on mineral resources for our energy demands in sectors such as industry, agriculture, transport, etc. coal,

petroleum and natural gas are the major energy resources. these are also called fossil fuels. let us examine them in detail. coal coal is the major source of thermal power in india. coal is a major industrial fuel. most of the coal found in india is of medium grade of bituminous type. resource wealth of india 151 west bengal, jharkhand, odisha, and chhattisgarh are the producing states. the largest coal field in india is jharia in jharkhand. the less energy efficient coal namely lignite is found in neyveli in tamil nadu. petroleum and natural gas

petroleum is the chief energy source for transportation through road, rail or air. other than petrol, diesel, etc. numerous by - products are also obtained from petroleum such as chemical fertilisers, artificial rubber, artificial fibres, vaseline etc. petroleum mining in india started at digboi in assam. petroleum producing states in india are assam, gujarat, and maharashtra. the largest of the oil fields is the mumbai - high in maharashtra. natural gas is the fuel obtained along with petroleum. exclusive reserves of natural gas also exist,

especially along the coasts of tamil nadu and andhra pradesh. mumbai - high a coal mine petroleum deposits are mostly confined to the coastal regions. why? nuclear minerals uranium and thorium are the major nuclear minerals. there are rich reserves of uranium in the states of jharkhand, rajasthan, 152resource wealth of india and maharashtra. thorium is produced from ilmenite and monazite deposits largely found in the coastal sands of kerala and tamil nadu. following are the major nuclear power plants in india. tarapur ( maharashtra ) rawatbhata ( rajasthan ) kalpakkam and koodamkulam

( tamil nadu ) kaiga ( karnataka ) kakrapaara ( gujarat ) narora ( uttar pradesh ) non - conventional sources of energy the mineral resources such as coal, petroleum, etc. are being harnessed for energy requirements since ages. hence such energy sources are called conventional sources. however, these minerals are getting exhausted from the earth due to their non - renewable nature. also, the burning of these minerals creates large scale environmental pollution. as a remedy to this, we have started utilising the non - conventional sources of energy. solar energy,

wind energy, wave energy, tidal energy, biogas, etc. are the major non - conventional energy sources in india. these cheap, renewable, and environment - friendly sources are given much priority in india. koodamkulam nuclear power plant prepare a seminar paper on the topic ' non - conventional sources of energy ' by enquiring their advantages and present it in the class. resource wealth of india 153 transport look at the collage. let us see how these varied means of transport are influencing the development of the nation. efficient mode of transport is essential for ensuring the

required raw materials in the areas of production and to bring the products to the consumers. modes of transport are selected in accordance with the physical characteristics of each region. road transport road transport is the most important means to link the rural and urban centres scattered throughout the country. see how the roads in india are classified based on the construction and management. national highways are the major roads in the country linking the state capitals, major cities, ports etc. the union ministry is responsible for the construction and management of such roads.

national highways roads village roads are those ensuring the domestic movement within the villages. more than 80 % of the roads in india are village roads. the construction and maintenance of such roads are done by the local self govern - ments. district roads district roads are those linking the district headquarters with the important places within the district. these roads are built and maintained by the district panchayats. state highways state highways are the major roads connecting the state capitals with the district head quarters. state governments are responsible for the

construction and maintenance of such roads. which are the national highways passing through kerala? village roads 154resource wealth of india the six - lane super highways connecting the metropolitan cities in india such as delhi, mumbai, chennai, kolkata are together named as ‘ the golden quadrangle super highway ’. the national highway authority of india is responsible for such roads. the density of roads is not uniform everywhere in india. the development of road network is mainly determined by the physiography and level of economic development of the region.

the density of roads is more over the northern plains, but less over the north eastern states. why? railways the largest railway network of asia is in india. the indian railways is also the largest public sector undertaking in india. rail transport is equally important for cargo as well as passenger transport. railway plays a decisive role in the industrial development of india. the rail transport in india was started in 1853. the first train ran along the 34 km - long rail between mumbai and thane. for administrative convenience, the indian railway is divided in to 16 zones.

enquire and identify the railway zone to which the rail network of kerala belongs. where is its headquarters? resource wealth of india 155 the projects to replace metre guage and narrow guage tracks to broad guage are on at an accelerated pace. the steam engines have given way to diesel and electric locomotives. metro rail projects are being established in major cities. rail gauge width between proportionate the rails rail length in india broad guage 1. 676 metres 74 % metre guage 1 metre 21 % narrow guage0. 762 metre / 5 % 0. 610 metre konkan railway the completion of the konkan rail -

way in 1998 is the most notable achievement of the indian railway. the total length is 760 km between roha in maharashtra and mangalore in karnataka. this track constructed across 146 rivers has about 2000 bridges and 91 tunnels. the longest railway tunnel in asia ( 6. 5 km ) is on this track. maharashtra, goa, and karnataka are the partners in this venture. is there any metro rail project in kerala? water transport water transport is the most convenient means to transport cargo on a large scale. look at the common advantages of water transport. the cheapest means of transport.

suitable for large scale cargo transport. does not cause environmental pollution. most suited for international trade. observe the table to understand how the indian railways is classified based on the gauge width of rails. 156resource wealth of india water transport can generally be classified in to two : inland water transport marine transport water bodies like rivers, lakes and canals are used for inland water transport. following are the waterbodies largely used for inland water transport in india. ganga - brahmaputra rivers and their tributaries

godavari - krishna rivers and their tributaries buckingham canal of andhra - tamil nadu region mandovi and zuvari rivers of goa back waters of kerala five of the inland waterways in india were declared as national waterways after the formation of the inland water transport authority in 1986. national waterway 1 ( nw 1 ) allahabad to haldia in the river ganga ( 1620 km ) national waterway 2 ( nw 2 ) sadia to dubri in the river brahmaputhra ( 891 km ) national waterway 3 ( nw 3 ) the west coastal canal in kerala from kollam to kottappuram ( 205 km )

national waterway 4 ( nw 4 ) canal from kakinada to puducherry linking godavari and krishna ( 1095 km ) national waterway 5 ( nw 5 ) brahmani - mahanadi delta river system linked to east cost canal ( 623 km ) inland water transport is utilised not only for passenger and cargo transport, but also for fishing and tourism. discuss the significance of inland waterways in the tourism sector of kerala and prepare notes. resource wealth of india 157 worksheet the location of major ports in india are marked in the map ( fig 8. 6 ). write the names of the ports in the corresponding location.

if needed, use the atlas. there are about 12 major and 185 minor ports situated in the west and east coasts of india. the ports in india have great significance in international trade. following are the major ports in india. kandla tuticorin mumbai chennai nheva sheva visakhapatanam marmagao paradip mangalore haldia kochi kolkata fig. 8. 6 158resource wealth of india air transport the air traffic in india is under the control of airport authority of india. there are 126 airports including 11 international airports under this establishment. the

international and domestic flight services are respectively handled by the corporations air india and indian airlines. a number of private companies also operate flight services in india. vizhinjam deep sea port project with the realisation of the vizhinjam deep sea multipurpose port, kerala will have two major ports. the project proposed to establish in public - private partnership ( ppp ) is developing the container port in the first stage. the nearness to the international shipping route as well as the natural depth of more than 24 metres are the character - istics of the proposed port.

how many international airports are there in india? which are they? now you might have understood that the resource diversity of india cannot be expressed in words. by judicious and scientific utilisation of these diverse resources, our country ' s bright future can be ensured. resource wealth of india 159 “ starts cultivation with the end of the winter season and harvests before the monsoon rains. ” identify the agricultural season to which the statement is related. which are the major crops cultivated in this season? sugar mills are confined to sugarcane producing regions. why?

make short notes i. golden quadrangle ii. universal fibre identify the ports mentioned i. southern most major port of india ii. major port in karnataka iii. major port other than kolkata in west bengal identify the mineral resource for which the following places are known. neyveli jharia digboi let us assess 160resource wealth of india extended activities prepare the distribution map of major crops on a chart paper and display it in the classroom. prepare a table showing the places connected by the major national highways in india with the aid of an atlas.

collect the pictures of trains in india along broad gauge, metre gauge, and narrow gauge and incorporate it in the picture collection. examine any indian currency note with you. which are the currency notes that are used in india? do you know which institution has the right to print these notes? look at the picture given. have you seen this anywhere? this emblem can be seen on indian currency notes. it is the emblem of the reserve bank of india, which is the institution that has the right to print indian currency notes. let us understand more about the reserve bank of india.

reserve bank of india the reserve bank of india is the apex bank of india. it was established in 1935. its headquarters is in mumbai. find out the important functions of the reserve bank of india from the chart given below. fig 9. 1 162financial institutions and services functions of reserve bank of india printing of currency controlling credit banker to government banker ' s bank which are the currency notes in use today? all currencies except the one rupee note are printed by the reserve bank of india. the one rupee note and its subsidiary coins are issued by the central finance department.

controlling credit the reserve bank of india increases the money supply in indian economy through the distribution of printed currency and through credit creation. control of credit is one of the main functions of the reserve bank. this is made possible by bringing about changes in the rate of interest. as rate of interest increases, volume of loans decreases and vice versa. banker to government another function of the reserve bank of india is to serve as the banker to the central and state governments. as a banker to the government, the reserve bank of india accepts deposits from

the government, sanctions loans and renders other banking services to them. the reserve bank of india does not charge any fees for these services. fig 9. 2 financial institutions and services 163 banker ' s bank the reserve bank is the apex bank of all banks. to advise and assist all banks in their operations is a function of the reserve bank. it acts as a last resort to all banks in their financial matters. we have understood that the reserve bank is the apex bank which controls all other banks. moreover, it controls and gives the necessary directions and advices to the financial institutions

in the country financial institutions financial institutions are those institutions where financial transactions like deposits, loans etc. take place. examine the chart given below. we can find the financial institutions functioning in financial sector by analysing the chart. let us see each one in detail. banks have you visited any banks? which are the banks functioning in your area? list them. fig 9. 3 financial institutions non banking financial institutions commercial cooperative development specialised banks banks banks banks mutual fund insurance non banking

institutions companies financial companies banks 164financial institutions and services state bank of india banks are institutions that accept deposits from the public and grant loans to the needy subject to conditions. they operate on the basis of the general guidelines and conditions set by the reserve bank of india. look at the chart given below. it is clear from the chart that interest is paid for the deposits accepted. similarly, it is clear that interest is imposed on the loans provided. the rate of interest on loans will be higher

than the rate of interest given for deposits. the difference between these interests is the main revenue of the banks. accept deposits from individuals, institutions, and government banks grant loans to individuals, institutions, and government give back the deposit amount with interest collect loan amount with interest prepare a note on the functioning of banks by visiting a bank in your area and analysing the chart. growth of banks in india the bank of hindustan established in 1770 is india ' s first modern bank. the growth of the banking sector since then can be divided into three phases.

financial institutions and services 165 the first phase stretches from 1770 to the nationalisation of banks in 1969. in this phase, the presidency banks, bank of bengal, bank of bombay, and bank of madras were established by the british east india company. the operation and the growth of banks were slow during this phase. the second phase stretching from 1969 to 1990, witnessed a speedy development of banks. the view that banks should operate with the aim of social progress led to the nationalisation of 14 banks in 1969 and six banks in 1980. in 1993, the nationalised bank,

new bank of india was merged with the punjab national bank. as a result, there are only 19 nationalised banks in india. in the third phase, stretching from 1991 onwards, banks started rendering services, other than their basic functions. there were several banking reforms which helped in quick and time saving services, ease of procedure, etc. introduction of automated teller machines ( atm ), credit card, phone banking, net banking, core banking, etc. are the results of the third phase of development. nationalised banks central bank of india bank of india punjab national bank

bank of baroda united commercial bank canara bank dena bank syndicate bank union bank of india allahabad bank indian overseas bank bank of maharashtra indian bank vijaya bank corporation bank andhra bank oriental bank of commerce punjab and sindh bank united bank of india the private banks which received license during this period introduced new and innovative functions at a much quicker pace. such banks are known as new generation banks. even though banks basically perform the same functions, there

exist differences in some operations. on the basis of operations, banks are classified into commercial banks, cooperative banks, development banks, and specialised banks. 166financial institutions and services commercial banks commercial banks are the oldest banks and have many branches. these banks, which play a major role in the country ' s financial activities, accept deposits from the public and grant loans to trade, industry, agriculture etc., subject to certain conditions. commercial banks private sector banks private indian banks private foreign banks public sector banks

regional rural banks ( rrbs ) these banks were established in 1975 to provide regional banking services to different states in india. they help small farmers, agricultural labourers, small entrepreneurs, etc. by providing loans. the different types of commercial banks can be understood from the flow chart. public sector commercial banks are owned by the government. their functions are controlled by the reserve bank. state bank of india and its associate banks, nationalised banks and regional rural banks together constitute public sector commercial banks. private indian

commercial banks and private foreign commercial banks are owned by private individuals. they also operate under the control of the reserve bank of india. private foreign commercial banks are those banks which have registered in india but have headquarters in a foreign country. financial institutions and services 167 function of commercial banks let ' s see the important functions of commercial banks. accepting deposits the main function of commercial banks is to accept deposits from the public. the bank provides interest for the amount

deposited. by analysing the flow chart let us see the ways in which deposits are accepted by commercial banks. savings deposit this scheme helps the public to deposit their savings. banks provide low interest rate for such deposits. the depositor can withdraw the money from the deposit, subject to restrictions. different banks have adopted different regulations regarding the number of times and the amount of money that can be withdrawn during a particular time period. the details of the amount deposited and withdrawn are stated in the passbook provided by the bank.

examine a passbook and write down the details in it. account number deposits savings deposit current deposit fixed deposit recurring deposit 168financial institutions and services current deposit this deposit facilitates depositing and withdrawing money many times in a day. this deposits are used mainly by traders and industrialists. this type of deposits does not receive any interest. discuss why current deposit does not receive any interest. fixed deposit fixed deposits are ideal for depositing money in banks by individuals and institutions for a specific period of time. the

interest rate is calculated on the basis of the time period for which the money is deposited. if the money is withdrawn only after the completion of the specific time period, then the specified interest rate will be provided. but if the amount is withdrawn before the maturity of deposits, then the interest rate will be lower. recurring deposits recurring deposits receive a specific amount every month for a specified period of time. the interest rate of recurring deposits will be higher than that of saving deposits but less than that of

fixed deposits. the interest rate will be less if the deposits are withdrawn before the maturity date. providing loans the amount of money accepted as deposit from the public is granted as loans by the banks. banks provide different types of loans to individuals and institutions. the interest rate of loans will be higher than the interest rate of deposits. there will be differences in the interest rate depending on the duration of loan, its purpose, etc. financial institutions and services 169 normally, bank loans are provided by accepting a collateral. a few are mentioned below :

physical assets - gold, property documents, etc. fixed deposit certificates banks also provide loans by accepting salary certificates. the loans given to individuals and institutions by accepting such collaterals are called cash credit. what are the purposes for which banks provide cash credit to the public? agricultural purposes industrial purposes constructing houses purchasing vehicles purchasing home appliances what are the purposes for which banks provide loans? find out and expand the list by visiting any commercial bank or by interviewing bank officials in your area.

another type of loan given by commercial banks to individuals is overdraft. this is an opportunity for a customer to withdraw money over and above the balance in his / her account. this facility is provided to individuals who have frequent transactions with the bank. generally, this opportunity is provided to individuals who maintain current deposits. let us see an example of overdraft. assume that an individual requires rs. 12000 but has only rs 10000 in his account. the bank can give rs. 12000. the additional amount of rs 2000 is given as overdraft. bank charges interest

for the additional amount. 170financial institutions and services we have understood the basic functions of banks. complete the given table based on what has been learnt. basic functions of banks accepting deposits providing loans different types of investments features loans features $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ other facilities and services provided by banks besides the basic functions, banks provide other facilities and services to the public. some of the services and facilities provided by commercial banks are given below.

majority of the banks provide locker facilities to individuals and institutions for keeping their valuable assets ( gold, property documents, etc. ). one key of the locker will be with the owner and the other will be with the bank. the locker can be opened only when both keys are jointly used. a certain amount is charged for availing this facility. demand draft is the facility provided by the banks to send money from one place to another. it is not necessary to have an account for this. financial institutions and services 171 the picture shows the application form for a demand draft and

a specimen demand draft. observe the form and write down the details that have to be provided while applying for dd. banks provide an opportunity to transfer money from anywhere in the world either to one ' s own account or to someone else ' s account. this service is called mail transfer. telegraphic transfer is the mechanism which can transfer money through a message. it is faster than mail transfer. the facility to withdraw money any time without going to the bank is made possible through automated teller machine ( atm ). today majority of the banks have this facility. now automated teller

machines of some banks provide the opportunity to deposit and withdraw money. for this, banks provide atm debit cards. find out the details on an atm card and list them. card number name of the bank emblem of the bank fig 9. 4 fig 9. 5 plastic money without keeping money in hand, all money requirements can be fulfilled by using cards. such cards are called plastic money. 172financial institutions and services money may be lost if we are not cautious while using atm cards. the important things to be followed are : make sure that there is no one at the counter.

do not share the atm personal identification number ( pin ) assure the balance amount on receiving the receipt of money withdrawal. do not carelessly throw away the receipt banks provide credit card facility which helps in purchasing products without having to keep money on person. credit card is also a plastic card. using this, goods and services can be purchased even without having sufficient cash in one ' s account. the money has to be remitted to the bank later within a specific period. a bank account is necessary for this. banks provide services like the payment of insurance

premium, telephone and electricity bills, and rendering services like mobile recharging, booking journey tickets, etc. some of the transactions of the government which were once operated only through the treasuries are now done through banks. service pension is also disbursed through banks. certain amount is imposed as service charge or commission for such services provided by banks to the public. have you used any of the services provided by banks? if yes, share the experience. modern trends in banking sector let us see some of the novel features of the banks that provide

service using advanced technology. electronic banking ( e - banking ) availing banking services has been made easy by computerisation and the availability of atm facility. electronic financial institutions and services 173 banking is a method by which all transaction can be carried out through net banking and tele banking. any time banking, anywhere banking, net banking, mobile phone banking, etc. are part of electronic banking. for this, the assistance of the bank employees is not required. bank account and net banking facility alone are required for this. how is this helpful?

money can be sent and bills can be paid anywhere in the world from home saves time low service charge let us see some facilities of electronic banking. core banking ( centralised online real - time exchange banking ) core banking is the facility which is arranged in such a way that the branches of all banks are brought under a central server so that banking services from one bank to another is made possible. as a result, atm, debit card, credit card, net banking, tele banking, mobile banking, etc have been brought together. naturally, transactions have become simple.

by using this facility, an individual can send money from his bank account to his friend ' s account elsewhere. co - operative banks co - operation, self help and mutual help are the working principles of co - operative banks. the main aim of co - operative banks is to provide monetary help to common people especially the villagers. farmers, artisans, small scale entrepreneurs, etc. chiefly avail the services of co - operative banks. the main aims of co - operative banks are the following : provide loans to the public. protect the villagers from private money lenders

174financial institutions and services along with fulfilling the basic banking functions just like commercial banks, cooperative banks disburse different types of loans to persons residing in villages and cities. prepare a note on the loans provided by cooperative banks by visiting any cooperative bank in your locality or by interviewing a bank employee. development banks apart from commercial banks and cooperative banks, development banks also operate in the financial sector. these banks provide long term loans for various needs such as

modernisation of industries. now, these banks provide loans to agriculture and trade sectors. some of the important features of development banks are given below. work as an agent that helps in the development of different sectors ( agriculture, industry, trade,. ). provide loans at low interest rate encourage saving habit among people look at the different levels of cooperative banks being represented here. state cooperative banks district cooperative banks primary cooperative banks apex body in the state cooperative sector provides financial assistance to district coopera -

tive banks and primary cooperative banks. operate at district centres provide assistance and guidance to primary co - operative banks. function in villages area of functioning is limited encourage saving habit in villagers provide loans to villagers at low interest rate financial institutions and services 175 provides loans for construction of house, small scale industry, and basic infrastructure development. the industrial finance corporation of india ( ifci ) is a development bank in india. specialised banks specialised banks provide financial help for the development

of certain specific sectors. they provide help to start new enterprises. certain specialised banks and their features are detailed below bank features exim bank of india provides loans for exporting and importing ( export import bank of india ) products. provides instructions to individuals who come into this sector. small industries development provides help to establish new small scale bank of india ( sidbi ) industries and to modernise existing industries. aim is to vitalize village industries. national bank for agricultural and apex bank in india which functions for the

rural development ( nabard ) development of villages and agriculture. unites all the banks which operate for the development of villages. provides financial assistance to agriculture, handicraft, small scale industries, etc. some new banks have emerged in the banking sector with certain specific aims. among these banks, the important ones are : mahila banks payment banks micro units development and refinance agency ( mudra ) bank 176financial institutions and services bharathiya mahila bank was started in november 2013. the slogan of this bank is ' women empowerment is india ' s

empowerment '. today, this bank has branches in various states. though the bank accepts deposits from all, it provides loans mainly to women. payment banks have been established to help the low income groups, small scale industrialists and migrated employees. they do not provide all facilities provided by banks. let us see some of their features. accept deposits upto only one lakh rupees from individuals. provide interest on deposits as specified by the reserve bank of india. do not provide loans charge a specific fee as commission for bank transactions.

only debit cards will be provided. a recently introduced bank for providing short term loans is mudra bank. mudra bank provides financial help to small scale entrepreneurs and micro finances. we have discussed the banks working in the financial sector. apart from these, there are non banking financial institutions as well. non banking financial institutions these institutions work in the financial sector but do not perform all the functions of a bank. they do basic functions such as accepting deposits, lending loans, etc. whereas some

services like withdrawal of cash by cheque, mail transfer, lockers are not provided. financial institutions and services 177 let us see the main non banking financial institutions in india and their operation. non banking finacial companies these are non banking financial institutions that operate under the supervision of the reserve bank of india. they are registered under the company act, 1936 and carry out the basic functions of the banks. the main services provided by such banks are : provide loans for hire purchases provide loan for construction of house provide gold loan

provide loan on the basis of fixed deposits running chitty kerala state financial enterprises ( ksfe ) is the major non banking financial company operating in kerala. visit a ksfe branch and prepare a note by collecting more information. mutual fund institutions mutual fund is a mode of investment. common man is not always able to invest in the share market directly. this limitation can be overcome through mutual fund. money is collected from various investors and is invested in share markets, debentures, etc. the profit or loss from this is distributed among the investors.

such institutions operate in both private and public sectors. institutions working in public sector are the unit trust of india ( uti ), life insurance corporation mutual fund ( lic mf ), sbi mutual fund, etc. 178financial institutions and services insurance companies insurance companies are institutions that provide financial protection to individuals ' life and wealth. they assure social security and personal welfare. the first insurance company of india was established in kolkata in 1818. today, insurance companies operate in public and private sectors. a major institution in india working

for the protection of individual ' s life and health is the life insurance corporation of india ( lic ). non life insurance companies that protect individuals from loss due to accidents, natural calamities, etc also operate in india. the general insurance company and four related companies are the non life insurance companies operating in the public sector. microfinance the aim of microfinance is to provide different financial services including micro credit to common people. this helps in encouraging saving habit among the low income groups in

the society and to seek self employment. the kudumbasree and men self - help groups operating in kerala and are examples of this. let us see a few major goals of microfinance. helps in collective development by mobilising money from individuals. helps to increase the standard of living of the poor. encourages saving habit makes use of the individual potential for group development. provides loans to members in need starts small scale enterprises individual ' s life wealth vehicles items in institutions agricultural crops export goods temporary enterprises ( circus, trade fairs. )

things that can be insured financial institutions and services 179 men / women in a locality join together and form small groups, which usually do not exceed 20 members. each member invests a fixed amount in the group. banks also provide loans at a low interest rate to these groups. the working capital of such groups is the amount collected from the members and the loans provided by banks at low interest rate. this amount is disbursed as loan among members in need. by using this capital and with the help of local self government

several small scale units function today. it is possible to protect the poor from the local money lenders through the activities of self help groups. some of the units operated by such groups in kerala are given below. find out more and add to the list. pickles and snacks units soap and washing powder units hotels dtp centres visit the kudumbasree units / self help groups in your area and prepare a report on their activities. " reserve bank of india acts as a last resort to all banks in their financial matters. " substantiate the statement on

the basis of the functions of the reserve bank of india. explain the basic functions of banks. explains the aims of mahila banks, payment banks and mudra bank. evaluate how microfinance helps the common man. let us assess 180financial institutions and services extended activities make an album of the emblems of different banks. visit ten houses in your locality and prepare a report on their transactions with financial institutions hints : - what services are availed? - what type of institution is approached? - what are the suggestions to improve the functioning of institutions?

organise a discussion related to the policies and procedures of the reserve bank of india by colleting news from the media. observe the pictures. we visit these institutions for various requirements. discuss the requirements satisfying for which we visit them and list them out. purchasing vegetables for cooking food. to avail treatment for diseases. 182consumer : satisfaction and protection can you prepare a list of our wants? it is clear that modern man has various wants such as food, cloth, shelter, education, health, entertainment, etc. for this, we use

goods and services. find out the goods and services used by you. do we pay for all the goods? do all services have to be rewarded? we are now in a situation where even water and air have to be paid for. think about the reasons for that. scarcity of resources increase in wants consumption, consumer consumption is the satisfaction of human wants using goods and services. a consumer is a person who purchases and uses goods and services by paying or agreeing to pay a price. in order to satisfy our wants, we depend primarily on sale outlets and

service centres. production, distribution, and consumption are inter related economic activities. in reality, all economic activities are meant to satisfy the consumers. satisfaction of the consumer " a customer is the most important visitor on our premises. he is not dependent on us. we are dependent on him. he is not an interruption in our work. he is the purpose of it. he is not an outsider of our business. he is a part of it. we are not doing him a favour by serving him. he is doing us a favour by giving us an opportunity to do so. " gandhiji consumer : satisfaction and protection 183

have you noticed gandhiji ' s words? discuss whether such a situation prevails today in sale outlets and service centres. while purchasing products, we ought to pay different prices for the same product in different shops. we wish to get goods at a fair price. what are the other aspects that a consumer expects while purchasing products and using services? quality reliability after sale services look at the experience given below. in the month of june, anu and vinu reached school with new umbrellas. even though both of them used their umbrellas carefully,

after two weeks anu ' s umbrella was so damaged that it could not be opened. vinu could use his umbrella well till the year end. in the above experience, which consumer was fully satisfied? why? the act of fulfilling the wants of the consumer through the consumption of goods and services is called satisfaction. we read news related to food poisoning after having food from hotels. there are various circumstances where the consumers are exploited or cheated. selling low quality products adulteration charging excess price doesn ' t such experience happen in your life? share it in the class.

184consumer : satisfaction and protection manipulation in weights and measures delay in making services available draw cartoons and collect reports and pictures on the subject ' consumer exploitation ' and conduct an exhibition in the class. what are the problems faced by consumers in the market? situations that lead to the exploitation of the consumers increase with the increase in the extent and intensity of consumption. consumers must be able to consume with ease and without being exploited. for this, laws, administrative measures, and consumer

education, etc. are necessary. let us see some laws existing in india. consumer protection act 1986 the consumer protection act 1986 clearly defines the consumer ' s rights and sets up special judiciary mechanisms for consumer protection in india. let us see some of the rights of the consumer as per the act. the right to be protected against the marketing of goods and services which are hazardous to life and property. the right to be informed about the quality related aspects of goods and services. the right to have access to goods and services at fair prices.

the right to be heard and to seek redressal at appropriate forums. the right to consumer education. the consumer courts were established as a result of this act. consumer : satisfaction and protection 185 consumer courts there may be situations in which the consumers are not satisfied with the dealings of the producers and distributors. under such circumstances, they can approach the consumer courts which are mechanisms for assisting or helping them as per the law. consumer courts play an important role in ensuring justice to the consumers. they settle consumer disputes by various means

including ensuring compensation for the consumers. the consumer courts are able to create confidence in the consumers and bring about a qualitative change in their lives. today, in india, consumers are utilising the services of consumer courts operating fruitfully at three levels - district, state and national. let us see the structure and jurisdiction of the district, state and national consumer courts. district consumer disputes redressal forum state consumer disputes redressal commission national consumer disputes redressal commission - functions at district level

- president and two members - at least one woman member - functions at state level - president and two members - at least one woman member - state government has the right to appoint more members. - functions at national level - president and not less than four members - central government has the right to appoint more members. after collecting evidence based on the complaint filed by the consumer, verdicts are given where the compensation claimed does not exceed rs 20 lakhs. verdicts are given on consumer disputes where compensation claimed is above rs. 20 lakhs but upto rupees one crore.

verdicts are given on disputes where compensation claimed exceeds rupees one crore consumer courts structure jurisdiction 186consumer : satisfaction and protection the procedures of the consumer courts are different from those of the general courts. the important features of consumer courts are as follows : simple procedures fast assurance of justice less court expenses it is sufficient to submit before the court a written petition about the loss and damages faced by the consumer. a nominal fee is charged on the basis of the value of the compensation claimed by the petitioner.

observe the sample form reproduced above and find out the details to be furnished while filing a complaint. situations when complaints about consumer disputes can be filed : when the purchased product is damaged or defective. consumer : satisfaction and protection 187 defective services received from government / non government / private institutions. appropriation of price over and above the amount legally fixed or marked on the outer casing. violation of the prevention of adulteration law sale of products which are harmful to life and safety

loss due to trading methods which lead to unfair practices and limited consumer freedom. giving misleading advertisement for increasing sales is advertisement a boon or bane? organise a debate on this topic. a student joined a university study centre and remitted the fees. but when the study materials were not made available in time, the student contacted the study centre and was informed that the university has discontinued the course. the study centre was not willing to refund the fees paid. the student filed a complaint against

this in the consumer court. the court verdict was to refund the entire fees paid and the student got the fees refunded. you have read about the experience of a complaint being settled in a consumer court. collect from the media different news related to the verdict of consumer courts. evaluate the extent to which the consumer courts are helpful in protecting the rights of consumers. the following are the compensations for consumer disputes obtained through consumer courts. replacing the product repayment of cash paid or excess amount appropriated monetary compensation for the loss

188consumer : satisfaction and protection direction to rectify the defects in services. stopping harmful trade practices prohibition of the sale of harmful food items reimbursement of the expenses incurred in lodging the complaint according to the consumer protection act 1986, apart from the consumer courts, three - level advisory councils have been set up. they are the district consumer protection council, state consumer protection council, and national consumer protection council. the responsibility of these councils is to advise the respective governments on consumer rights.

prepare a report on the procedures of consumer courts by interviewing a legal expert. apart from the consumer protection act 1986, there are many other acts for the protection of the consumers. important among them are mentioned below. sale of goods act, 1930 it ensures that the prescribed conditions of sale are met while purchasing products. violation of guarantee, warranty, after sale services, etc. comes under this act. agriculture produce ( grading and marking ) act, 1937 this act is meant for determining the standard of agricultural products. essential commodities act, 1955

this act protects the consumers from supernormal profit, hoarding, black marketing, etc. weights and measures act, 1976 this act is helpful in preventing cheating in weights and measures. consumer : satisfaction and protection 189 administrative mechanism due to the strict checking by the food safety department at the check posts, the in - stances of poisonous veg - etables being brought to kerala has decreased on a large scale. 2015 august 27 the search by the legal metrology department during the onam season in the district resulted in cases being filed against 271 per -

sons for manipulation of weights and measures. 2015 august 27 note these newspaper clippings. which are the departments that have taken actions? there are different departments and institutions working for the protection of consumers ' interests. let ' s take a look at some of them. legal metrology ensures the weights and department measures standards food safety department ensures the quality of food products central drugs price controls price of medicines control committee drugs control department ensures the quality and safety of medicines.

food safety and standard ensures the quality of food authority of india products at various stages like production, distribution, storage, sale and import. find out more institutions and departments like the above and collect news related to them. 190consumer : satisfaction and protection there are some symbols that are given on the basis of assessing the standard of products and institutions. the symbols help the consumers in ascertaining the quality of products and institutions. let us see some of them. isi stamp is given by the bureau of indian standard ( bis )

to ensure a fixed quality of products. this symbol can be seen in products such as electrical appliances, cement, paper, paint and gas cylinder. international organisation for standardisation ( iso ) certifies the quality of goods and services of more than 120 countries including india. international organisation for standardisation ( iso ) gives certification to different products and service institutions like hospitals, banks, etc. it indicates the purity of gold jewellery this symbol is used internationally to certify the safety of electronic and electrial appliances

agmark symbol is used to ensure the quality of agricultural and forest products. it certifies the safety and quality of products processed from fruits and vegetables. fpo is the short form of food products order. these symbols are marked to distinguish between vegetarian and non vegetarian food items. consumer : satisfaction and protection 191 intervention of the society official mechanisms and laws alone cannot ensure the satisfaction of the consumers. intervention of an alert society is necessary for this. what are the ways in which the intervention of the society can

be made possible? functioning of consumer organisations consumer awareness public interest litigation consumer education everyone is a consumer. variety in products, personal interest, increasing demands, influence of market force, etc. has complicated and widened the scope of consumption. consumer education is necessary for the acquisition of right habits by the consumers. what are the ways by which consumer education can be ensured? awareness programmes inclusion in the curriculum observance of the national consumer day what are the ways in which consumers are

empowered through consumer education? helps to consume sensibly as per the wants. helps to acquire information regarding products and services enables the consumer to make the right choices. national consumer day in india, december 24 is observed as the national consumer day. in 1985, the united nations organisation passed a resolution on the guidelines regarding consumer protection. on that basis, government of india passed an act on consumer protection. this act came into force on 24 december 1986. make a list of the products which have these symbols.

192consumer : satisfaction and protection makes the consumer aware of his / her rights makes them capable of intervening in consumer disputes let us see what habits will be formed as a result of consumer education programmes. let us assess the satisfaction of the consumers is the main aim of all economic activities. do you agree with this statement? why? what are the situations in which the consumers are exploited? what are the rights included in the consumer protection act? the consumer courts guard consumer rights. substantiate. ask for the bill for every purchase made

make sure that the weights and measures are accurate make sure, while purchasing packed items, that the name of the product, date of packing, expiry date, weight, price, and producer ' s / distributor ' s address are stated note the symbols representing the standard of the products understand how to use and operate the products purchased prepare a consumer awareness wall magazine listing right consumer habits. a happy consumer society can be created only with the combined effort of the government, non - governmental institutions, and society.

prepare a note on the importance of consumer education consumer : satisfaction and protection 193 how do advertisements adversely affect the consumer? explain with examples. compare the functioning of the legal metrology department and the district consumer redressal forum. what all can be included in the seminar paper to be presented in a seminar in the school on world consumer day? describe the ways in which you can intervene in the consumer disputes in your area? extended activities prepare a magazine including different types of creative

work and articles related to consumer protection. make a power point presentation with slides on consumer awareness. organise a class level exhibition by collecting news pertaining to the functioning of consumer courts and related institutions.